"caesar SUOS A proelio continebat, ac satis habebat in praesentia hostem rapinis, pabulationibus populationibusque prohibere."|"suos a proelio continebat; They wrere now moving down along the west bank of the Saone, toward Chalons. The region here is very broken, and so did not give Caesar the wished for opportunity to fight. This may account for his delay to attack."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESChapter VIIIinterea: ***in tne meantime,*** i.e., from the time the Helvetian agents left him, April i, until the designated time of their return, April 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipsos : The Helvetii and their associates."

"NOT FOUND"|"The infantry was arranged in close masses, like the old Greek phalanx, with their heavy shields overlapping, forming a complete obstruction to the opposing javelins. The test of this arrangement was in the first furious onslaught, which often swept everything before it. If the first charge failed, the rest of the fight was at a woful disadvantage to the crowded Gauls. Sometimes, as Caesar relates in the next chapter, the heavy javelins of the Romans penetrated the overlapping shields, thus binding them firmly together and imprisoning the wiggling, stifling mass beneath."

"NOT FOUND"|"igni: Barbarous and inhuman practices seem to have been not uncommon among the Gauls. See the quotation from Froude, in Chapter I, last sentence. Human sacrifice was sometimes offered in religious ceremony. Fire was the common fate of traitors."

"NOT FOUND"|"dimittit, retinet: The omission of the conjunction is called asyndeton. What is polysyndeton ? (See Notes of chapter 5.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Oppidum vs. vicus : The distinction of meaning of these words is not more a question of size than of fortifications. About the former was always a wrall. The latter was a group of houses in the open country. The existence of towms, villages, buildings, and farms, herein mentioned, shows the Gauls to have advanced far beyond the primal state of human life.NOTESreliqua aedificia: This means all buildings not already burned; that is, all structures on the outlying farms, beyond town or village limits."

"NOT FOUND"|"L. Cassium: This is an incident of the attempted invasion of Italy by the Cimbri and Teutones, Germanic tribes, with Gallic allies, in 107 B. c. The army of L. Cassius Longinus was one of five or six to be defeated by the barbarians during those fearful years from 113-105 B. c. Only in 102 B. c., by Marius at Aquae Sextiae (Aix), near Marseilles, and in 101 B. c. at Vercellae, in Italy, were these disasters fully avenged. *** The homeless people of the Cimbri and their comrades w^ere no more*** (Mommsen)."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam MAGNIS ITINERIBUS contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, cum his quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"magnis itineribus : From 20 to 25 miles per day. proximum iter: He returned from Aquileia by way of Turin, where he levied the duas legiones mentioned, and thence on to the pass of Mont Gen&vre, just south of the famous Mt. Cenis tunnel of to-day, and near the modern Brian5on. Here he was attacked by mountaineers, whom he speedily repulsed."

"qui ubi pro perfuga ad eos venit, timorem romanorum proponit, quibus angustiis IPSE CAESAr a venetis prematur docet,  neque longius abesse quin proxima nocte sabinus clam ex castris exercitum educat et ad caesarem auxilii ferendi causa proficiscatur."|"ipse : Caesar. How far had he marched since two o***clock ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"clientes: Retainers or devoted followers, whom oath and sacred custom compelled to follow their chief, like the vassal of the middle ages. Caesar here uses a Latin word which to the Roman gave at once a clear idea of that relationship of lord and vassal which reached its fullness of growth in mediaeval times; for it existed in Rome as well as Gaul under the name of client and patron. Thus Caesar does not enter into explanation of the matter, for he knows hisgitized by GoogleTHE BEGINNER'S CAESARpeople are already familiar with it at home. In a subsequent book however, he again mentions this institution, and shows especial interest in a peculiar feature of it. In Book III, Chapter 22, Caesar tells us that when Crassus was campaigning in the southwest and besieging an Aquitanian town, a certain leader of the enemy came rushing out from another less well-guarded part of the town, accompanied by six hundred devoted followers called soldurii. Caesar***s brief account of the condition of these retainers is valuable. He says they enjoy all the advantages of life with him to whose service they are sworn, and if misfortune befalls him, they suffer the same fate or commit suicide. Caesar adds that never in human memory has a soldurius refused death after his master. This relationship was the natural, perhaps inevitable, growth of a time when might was right, and the rule that only of the strong. It is a mark of a higher civilization than that of the past, that we have been able to devise a better social order than that of vassalage."

"NOT FOUND"|"Considius: What had been his military experience? Answer: He had been in active service under two of the most successful generals, in several of the greatest wars waged by Rome, the Mithridatic and the Servile."

"NOT FOUND"|"trium mensium: This would seem to show how long a time it might take them to reach their new home. Let the pupil pause to contemplate what a vast amount of food would be required for 368,000 people for three months! It has been variously estimated that it took six to twelve thousand wagons and about twenty-five thousand draught animals, extending along a line of thirty to fifty miles, to transport this food."

"NOT FOUND"|"multitudinem cogerent: See again the extract from Froude, in regard to the mustering of men (Notes, Chapter I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Notice carefully that Caesar sometimes speaks of Gallia as merely one of the three divisions of *** Gaul as a whole.***Belgae, Aquitani, Celtae: These nations are represented to-day by the Welsh, Basques of northwestern Spain, and the Irish and Highland Scotch, respectively."

"NOT FOUND"|"a. d. V. Kal. Apr. : ante diem quintum Kalendas Apriles, *** the fifth day before the Kalends of April,*** nominally March 28. This is a peculiar construction. It is an instance of case by attraction, corresponding to mode by attraction, explained in Rule 94. Kalendas is the object of ante. Diem is said to be drawn away from the usualOriginal from UNIVERSITY OF 1CNOTESablative of time when by its proximity to ante. Apriles is an adjec tive, modifying Kalendas."

"lucius aurunculeius compluresque TRIBUNI MILITUM et primorum ordinum centuriones nihil temere agendum neque ex hibernis iniussu caesaris discedendum existimabant: quantasvis [magnas] copias etiam germanorum sustineri posse munitis hibernis docebant: rem esse testimonio, quod primum hostium impetum multis ultro vulneribus illatis fortissime sustinuerint: re frumentaria non premi; interea et ex proximis hibernis et a caesare conventura subsidia: postremo quid esse levius aut turpius, quam auctore hoste de summis rebus capere consilium?"|"4.	Tribuni militum: Until displaced by the legati, these, six to each legion, held rank next to the commander. In earlier times they led the legion in turn, but in Caesar***s army we find them outranked by the legati, and reduced to subordinate services. This was a most beneficent reform, for these tribuni were of the equestrian rank, or order of knights, and had been appointed through family influence, and not because of military skill. This change awakened no animosity on the part of these deposed favorites of fortune, for Caesar used his customary tact, and to them were given functions more genteel; for, instead of leading rough men to the fray, they hereafter were to sit in councils of war and preside at courts-martial."

"NOT FOUND"|"Great precautions were taken day or night to guard against surprise. One or twTo cohorts wTere in statione before each gate, and a squadron (turma) of horse patrolled the camp. Another cohort guarded the quarters of the general' and quaestor. At night, the guard was divided into four reliefs to correspond with the divisions of the night (vigiliae). The three reliefs not on duty slept on their arms, ready for action."

"NOT FOUND"|"The principes were not necessarily the same men as the magistratus."

"NOT FOUND"|"In form, the camp was either square or rectangular, as nearly as the situation would*allow. Let the pupil draw the plan from the following description. See also the camp-plan in any book of antiquities."

"NOT FOUND"|"tacuisse: This shows how strong the anti-Roman feeling had become, even among the people hitherto most loyal to Rome."

"eodem die ab exploratoribus certior factus hostes SUB MONTE consedisse milia passuum ab ipsius castris octo, qualis esset natura montis et qualis in circuitu ascensus qui cognoscerent misit."|"sub monte: This was Mt. Tauffrin, in the Cote d***or ridge, vigilia: About what hour was it ? (See Vocabulary.) pro-praetore: The governor of a province w^as usually called praetor or pro-praetor. He was supreme in military and civil authority. In case of a critical state of war in any province, a consul was sent as governor of the province, with the title pro-consul. Such in name was Caesar in Gaul. But he was practically praetor of Gaul,i.e. governor of Gaul. In as much as the praetor was supreme in military affairs, the word praetor means ***commanding general,*** as well as governor. Caesar uses the word in this sense in the text. Labienus was sent on this mission, like an envoy plenipotentiary, with full authority of a commanding general."

"ad multam noctem etiam ad impedimenta pugnatum est, propterea quod PRO VALLO carros obiecerunt et e loco superiore in nostros venientes tela coniciebant et non nulli inter carros rotasque mataras ac tragulas subiciebant nostrosque vulnerabant."|"pro vallo carros: This was the usual fortification of a Gallic camp. How does this compare with the Roman ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Hence we see that Divico may have been purposely selected to offend and taunt the Romans, possibly even to frighten them from further pursuit. Unfortunately for them, Caesar was their Nemesis."

"NOT FOUND"|"vergobretus : The real title in the Celtic language w*as guergbreth, *** executor of judgment.*** Caesar latinizes the word into vergobretus."

"NOT FOUND"|"suam familiam: The meaning of this is now a mooted question. The derivation of this word, from famulus, *** servant,*** seems to show plainly that it means a gang of servants or slaves, rendered by the one word ***household.*** Caesar***s sentence is then properly constructed, for the clients and debtors are separate and additional members of the entire retinue of Orgetorix, and not to be considered a part of the familia. If not so, then his sentence is carelessly written. The latter fact is sometimes argued."

"ad multam noctem etiam ad impedimenta pugnatum est, propterea quod pro vallo carros obiecerunt et e loco superiore in nostros venientes tela coniciebant et non nulli inter CARROS ROTASQUE mataras ac tragulas subiciebant nostrosque vulnerabant."|"carros rotasque: Some MSS. have reddsque, the reda being a four- wheeled wagon. However, the frequency with which hendiadys occurs renders the first reading probable. (See Rule of Syntax, 97.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Plutarch says that he had happy talents from nature for a public speaker, and as he did not lack ambition to cultivate them, he was undoubtedly the second orator in Rome. But he never rose to that pitch of eloquerce to which his powers might have carried him, being rather engaged in those wars and political intrigues which at last gained him the empire."

"NOT FOUND"|"scutis: The Gallic shield was rectangular, sometimes oval, four feet long, two and one half feet wide."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallia, or Gaul, may be regarded roughly as the region now covered by France. More particularly, it was the section of continental Europe west of the Alps and the Rhine, including Switzerland, and north of the Pyrenees mountains. To this may be added the land below the Alps, which Caesar calls Gallia citerior, and which the northern tribes of Europe, some five hundred years before, had overrun, not stopping short of the sack of the great Rome itself."

"NOT FOUND"|"Thus Rome was waging a double-headed warfare erf arms and debauchery. The one followed the ravages of the other, and already in Caesar***s day the former bold and hardy tribes of Gaul, that *** once magnificent people, were in a state of change and decomposition.***In order that the pupil may understand better the environment of the people against whom Caesar planned and executed his victorious campaigns, we quote here a few lines from Fronde:***The Gauls had yielded to contact with the Roman Province. They had built towns and villages. They had covered the land with farms and homesteads. They had made roads. They had bridged rivers, even such rivers as the Rhone and the Loire. They had amassed wealth, and had adopted habits of comparative luxury, which, if it had not abated their disposition to fight, had diminished their capacity for fighting."

"NOT FOUND"|"regna: The plural is used because the political sovereignty of three states is meant, tres populos : Helvetii, zEdui, Sequani."

"NOT FOUND"|"His surviving wrorks are seven Books of the Gallic War, and three on the Civil War, and a few fragments on other subjects."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXVIIIin hostium numero : Euphemistic for slaughtering or selling into slavery."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESDumnorix: What was his fate? (See Vocabulary.) Give in review an account of him, as given by Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"The Cavalry: Caesar here mentions for the first time the cavalry. It is said he had no horsemen when he came into*Gaul, but he commenced at once and raised a force of about 4000, as stated, from the Province and especially from the Aidui and their client tribes. Others say that there was always a regular contingent of cavalry in every legion, mercenary troops from Spain and Germany, as well as from Gaul. These contingent forces of cavalry, however, are rarely mentioned, Caesar***s pride being in his own Roman legionaries. Whatever the fact may be concerning the existence at Caesar***s time of a regular cavalry, it is certain that temporary levies were made from Gallic states subject or favorable to Rome. These probably disbanded on the approach of winter, appearing again in the spring."

"producit servos,  quos in pabulatione paucis ante diebus exceperat et famE VINCULISque excruciaverat."|"Ez vinculis : *** In chains.***damnatum . . . oportebat: Note that Caesar omits eum, which is the implied object of sequi, the whole being the subject of the impersonal verb."

"nam hoc toto proelio, cum ab HORA SEPTIMA ad vesperum pugnatum sit, aversum hostem videre nemo potuit."|"hora septima: *** The seventh hour.*** What o***clock was it ? (Answer: The hora was the unit of daylight. The time from sunrise to sunset was divided into twelve equal parts, or horae. The length of an hora, then, varied with the season from about 45 minutes to one hour and a quarter. At this particular season, the sun rose about 5 and set at 7. How many hours of daylight? Answer 14. How many minutes in each hora ? Answer 70. Then what o***clock was it when the battle began ? Answer 1 p. M.) Let the pupil show the solution of this problem. Let the teacher give others like it."

"caesari renuntiatur helvetiis esse in animo per agrum sequanorum et haeduorum iter in santonum fines facere, qui non longe a tolosatium finibus absunt, quae civitas est IN PROvincia."|"in prox. collem: Caesar could have hoped for no more fortunate turn of affairs. He was now put on the defensive, and could choose his own position. What do you notice concerning the usual situation of the battle lines ? In this battle, where did he station his veteran legions ? His newly enrolled legions ? His foreign allies ? His baggage ? His camp ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"The cavalry was divided into regiments (alae) of about 300 men each; these again divided into ten squadrons (turmae) of thirty men; and these again into three decuries (decuriae) of ten men each, in charge of decurions (chapter 23). The chief officer of an ala was called praefectus equitum, being usually a Roman, sometimes a native, as in chapter 18, where Dumnorix is mentioned as being in command of the zEduan cavalry."

"NOT FOUND"|"Dumnorigem Aeduum: In Book VI, chapter 12, Caesar says the leaders of the two factions wrere the ALdui, for Rome; the Sequani, for the people. This is but a broad statement of the situation; for, as he himself says again, as stated above, in every district, in every hamlet, and even in families, there was the same factional strife. Dumnorix was the ardent leader of the national factionOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESamong the zEdui. Thus he favored the coming of the Helvetii. With the success of the patriots, he hoped for the regnum (see Notes to chapter 3), not of the Sequani alone, but perhaps of Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"Usually he was narrowly restricted by the Senate, subject to its whims, but Caesar in Gaul was autocratic. He could increase his forces at will, and make war or peace without consulting the Senate."

"NOT FOUND"|"Of this trait Cicero speaks in his masterly wTay: ***. . . Nudi omni ornatu orationis, tanquam veste detracta *** *** bare of all adornment, like an undraped human form.***We are reminded of Scott***s headlong speed, when Hirtius tells us,NOTESin speaking of the Gallic Commentaries, *** While others know how faultlessly they are written, I know with what ease and rapidity he dashed them off.***Chapter XVcastra movent: *** They break camp.***The Roman Camp: This was the solace of the Roman soldier, an ever present help in time of trouble. To-day, in the reverses of battle, an army is exposed to all the dangers of a disorderly retreat, only to be more widely and hopelessly scattered, as it withdraws; in the days of Rome, however, the army frequently retired before its advancing foe into the shelter of its camp, *** solis occasu suas copias in castra reduxit, *** being one of the stereotype phrases, soon familiar to every reader."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XIXiniusso suo et civitatis : suo refers to Caesar; civitatis means the ALdui."

"helvetii, seu quod timore perterritos romanos discedere a se existimarent, eo magis quod pridie SUPERIORIBUS LOCIS occupatis proelium non commisissent, sive eo quod re frumentaria intercludi posse confiderent, commutato consilio atque itinere converso nostros a novissimo agmine insequi ac lacessere coeperunt."|"superioribus locis : What is the allusion?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXIIIfrumentum: Describe the food of the Roman soldier as to kind, quantity, mode of preparation, and apportionment. What officer disbursed supplies? How might the soldier obtain delicacies? (See Notes to chapter 16.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"petentibus Aeduis: Why did the JEdui want these brave allies? See Notes to chapter 9, as to the political situation."

"NOT FOUND"|"Genava: This is a Celtic word, gena, meaning mouth, since at this point the Rhone gorges the waters of the lake into its narrowbed."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XVIIIDumnorix: Read again the text of chapters 3 and 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quintilian says that he spoke with the same spirit with which he fought, and by application would have equalled Cicero."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXIIprima luce : At what hour ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"The triple formationOn the field of battle, the cohorts were drawn up in triplex acies. The men of each cohort stood ten deep, and each cohort in a line stood 120 feet apart. The veteran cohorts stood in front, and the best troops were in the first cohort. The following diagram will show the arrangement of a legion in triplex acies, so often mentioned by Caesar:The beginner's Caesar; being mainly the simplified text of the Bellum helveticum of the Commentaires, by Harrison Dickinson Cannon.	1n	10o	10Google	14by Google	45i ny Google	49Google	54by Google	73**.	He married my daughter.	88< by Google	99The Genitive	106The Dative	109The Accusative	1111.	Subject of the Infinitive is in the accusative.	112The Ablative	112Addendum: Degree of Difference (see Rule 8i).	115In Independent Sentences	115Subjunctive in Dependent Clauses	116Google	119Special Functions of the Indicative	120Google	120Conditional Sentences	121Indirect Discourse	123Google	123n	133o	133n	170o	170Google	173Google	176ADJECTIVES.	177First and Second Declensions,	177Irregular Comparison.	181Pronouns.	185b** Google	186Indefinite.	187Second Conjugation.-B-Verbs.	191* Google	199Google	215Google	221Google	223OCto, eight.	231izeo by Google	240HINDS, NOBLE & ELDREDGE, Publishers,	243New York City.	243HINDS, NOBLE & ELDREDGE, Publishers,	244New York City*	244Idioms of Caesar	245Cicero's Idioms	245Complete, with English equivalents* Alphabetically arranged for ready reference, or for serial memorizing & & J* J*	245How to Study Literature* A novet, a poem, a history, a	250n	253o	253Auxilia : The auxiliaries were milites levis armaturae, *** soldiers in light armor.*** These were slingers, who hurled stones or lead bullets, the archers or bowmen, and the cavalry."

"NOT FOUND"|"equitatum: What does Caesar do with his cavalry in this instance ? Understand that this was their usual position in the line of march. Describe the source, use, and organization of the cavalry. (See Notes to chapter 15.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XVIIesse nonnullos: Review the Notes of chapter 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the conspiracy of Orgetorix ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"As to the wall and moat which wrere constructed from Geneva to the pass of the Jura, a distance of about eighteen miles by the river, but only half that in a straight line, the labor of construction does not seem wonderful when we are told that recent surveys show that the total extent of space requiring fortification was only about three miles. The work was probably done in as many days. The reason for this short distance is that the south bank of the river is very rugged, being quite precipitous in most places. Thus only at exposed places, where the bank was sloping, were defenses necessary to prevent the enemy from fording and scaling the opposite shore. A clear idea of the appearance of these walls and ditches will be gained by a study of the cut on page 44."

"NOT FOUND"|"2.	Legati: These were lieutenant-generals of the dux belli, appointed by the Senate, and usually three in number. Caesar had ten in Gaul. They were entirely subject to their commander, having been chosen on his nomination. Caesar usually placed them in command of a legion each, and in his absence he conferred upon them the imperium, the lieutenant then being called legatus pro praetore."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones certissimae res accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo iniussu suo et civitatis sed etiam INSCIENTIBUS IPSIS fecisset, quod a magistratu haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare in eum aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"inscientibus ipsis : ipsis refers to both Caesar and the AMui. a magistratu Aeduorum : To whom does this refer? What wasOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CAESARhis official title, in both Celtic and Latin ? What was his authority ? (See Notes and text of chapter 15.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXIVThe battleThe place: Colonel Stoffel, in his Histoire de Jules Char, says the field of battle was near the village of Montmort, southeast of Mont Beuvray, and three miles northwest of Toulon."

"NOT FOUND"|"The survivors: *** Half of the fighting men of the Swiss were killed; their camp was stormed; the survivors, with the remnant of the women and children (a little more than a third remained of those who had left Switzerland), struggled on to Langres, where they surrendered.*** *** Froude."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boios . . . concessit: The more usual order w ould be Aeduis petentibus, ut Boios in finibus suis collocarent, quod Boii egregia virtute cogniti erant, Ccesar id concessitVirtute (Boiorum): What had the Boii done of remarkable courage ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"The Belgae: The Belgian tribes commonly claimed German origin. Strabo calls them 7epfiaviKdv **0vos, a *** Germanic people.*** And Hirtius, in the Eighth Book, says, *** They are not much different from the Germans.***The Celtae: These are the people whom the Romans meant especially when they spoke of Gauls. In Caesar***s time they had fallen from the position of headship of all France to a third part in the territorial division which he describes. They called themselves *** Children of Night,*** whence the origin of our expression fortnight and se'nnight *** in accordance with the Gallic manner of reckoning time by night. Modem scholars have learned a little of their language from proper names and inscriptions, which show them to be a branch of the Aryan race, which swept westward from Asia over Europe long before the time of Greece or Rome. For the EnglishNOTESmeaning of some Celtic proper names, see the Vocabulary of this book."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesar supplemented his native oratorical talent by a course of training at Rhodes, under the most skillful teacher of rhetoric and oratory of his time, Apollonius Molon,igitized by GoogleTHE BEGINNER'S CAESARCicero, who often heard him, said that there was a pregnancy in his sentences and a dignity in his manner which no orator in Rome could approach. He surpassed those who had practiced no other art."

"NOT FOUND"|"in Italiam: Nominally, Italy extended north only to the Rubicon river. Caesar went only to Aquileia, near the head of the Adriatic, now Aquila, an inconsiderable city, long since outgrown by Venice. At that time Aquileia was the chief recruiting station for the northwest, and very strongly fortified."

"NOT FOUND"|"Another conclusive reason for resisting the emigration itself is found to have been in Caesar***s mind, by the fact that after the defeat of the enemy at Bibracte, near Autun (chapter 26), he ordered the remnant of the people to return to Helvetia; for he knew', if it w***ere left vacant, hordes of Germans would fill it, and from there out again they would follow in the wake of the Helvetii, and thus Rome would soon have to do with a still fiercer and still more dreaded foe."

"NOT FOUND"|"Segusiavi: These were clients of the Aidui, hence mainly favorable to Rome. They were situated around modem Lyons. Caesar crossed the Rhone above Lyons, keeping a northwesterly route toward the Saone, thus aiming to reach the rear of the advancing host.NOTESIn tracing his route at this point, there is a little uncertainty. If he crossed the Rhone below Lyons, into the main country of the Segusiavi, as is to be inferred from his last statements in this chapter, then it were necessary that he recross the Rhone or pass over the Saone above Lyons, in order to get into the rear of the enemy, who were crossing the latter river on their way westward, as described in chapter 12. But Caesar makes no mention of such a detour. Thus it is generally interpreted that the Segusiavi reached across the river at Vienne, and occupied more or less of the region on the east side northward from that point. Thus, as stated, it is generally understood that he kept on in a northwesterly route, across this arm of the Segusiavan country, crossing the Rhone above Lyons, where it turns to the east."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXVIdiu atque acriter: It cost him a long and severe conflict to drive their army out of the field. The fight lasted from noon till night. The barbarians fought gallantly, and in numbers were enormously superior. Plutarch says there were 190,000 fighting men among them, while Caesar***s army did not,exceed 25,000. ***But the contest was between sturdy discipline and wild valor; and it concluded as such contests always must.***ancipiti proelio: That is, on two fronts. Explain this, alteri; alteri: The Helvetii; the Boii and Tulingi.I 31carros: About how many carts are estimated to have been in the migration ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"What was Caesar***s probable inference, from the report of his scouts, as to Labienus ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"interpretibus: Why were interpreters necessary in the Roman army in Gaul ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Procillus: This man was a cultured Gaul, an intimate friend and important character in Caesar***s chronicle. In Book I, chapter 47, Caesar speaks highly of his birth, character, and linguistic attainments."

"NOT FOUND"|"Studium . . .temperantiam: Notice the omission of conjunctions. What is this frequent omission in Caesar called ? eius : i.e. of Dumnorix."

"NOT FOUND"|"To enable the student to understand the many references in Caesar to the Roman camp, the following brief account is given : ***A Roman army never halted for the night without entrenching itself. As the day***s march approached its close, being usually about noon, the army having marched from about four or live A.M., a detachment of centurions, scouts, and surveyors was sent ahead to select a spot for encampment, and stake out the camp. In Book II, chapter 17, we read : exploratores centurionesquepraemittit, qui locum idoneum castris deligant."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XQuiet at last followed the repeated but vain attempts of the Helvetii to scale the south bank of the Rhone, and enter the possessions of the Allobroges, as described in chapter 8. To know the cause of the lull and what was transpiring in the Helvetian quarters, Caesar sent scouts, who brought back word (Caesari renuntiatur) of the intended movements of the enemy."

"NOT FOUND"|"phalange:	This	was	a	common	Gallic	form	of charge or defense."

"NOT FOUND"|"praesidia, castella : The former were forces, occupying the latter. The castella were little forts, built at the more open and accessible points along the river. The engineers who surveyed the ground by direction of Napoleon III, already mentioned in these Notes, found traces of these structures. About four redoubts, or castella, were located. It would be ill advised to associate these fortresses with the fords, since the Helvetii were in possession of boats and rafts, which made them independent of shallows. Knowing this, the Romans certainly took no notice of fords in locating their castella. Hence the statement that in those days there were more fords than at present does not follow from this fact of the castella."

"NOT FOUND"|"This thought turns us to the question of Caesar***s religious creed. Froude says in his admirable chapter on Caesar, the man: *** He found no reason for supposing that there was a life beyond the grave. He respected the religion of the Roman State as an institution established by the laws. His own writings contain nothing to indicate (prove?) that he himself had any religious belief at all.*** Another writer has said: ***A disbeliever in the superstitions of his day, he yet seems to acknowledge the presence of a controlling power.***Chapter XIIIpontem in Arare: This was, of course, a bridge of boats, called a 14 pontoon,*** probably constructed of the vessels which were bringing food up the river, as stated in chapter 16."

"NOT FOUND"|"Answer : *** He was a good horseman, and brought that exercise to such perfection by practice that he could sit a horse at full speed, with his hands behind him.*** *** Plutarch."

"NOT FOUND"|"On each side was a gateway. From the porta praetoria, facing the enemy, to the rear gate, porta decumana, ran a road or *** street,*** fifty feet wide. Likewise, the gates on the right and left were joined by a still wider road, called the via principalis, thus dividing the camp into two unequal parts. The larger part was assigned to the legionaries, and was itself cut by the via quintana. The smaller part was chiefly the headquarters of the general and his staff (legati, quaestores, and tribuni). Between the rampart or wall (vallum) and the tents was a space, 200 feet wide, reaching around the camp. This was to prevent the enemy from firing the tents, and also to give room for deploying the troops."

"NOT FOUND"|"Judging Rome by her previous history and even by events then going on in other parts of her frontier, this may be true. Yet the force of Caesar***s argument, that it would be dangerous to have such a hostile and warlike people as the Helvetii as neighbors to the Romanized tribes of the western part of the province, separated not by impassable mountains, but by reaches of open and level plains, must be credited. Furthermore, there was no surety that the emigrants would abide in their new home. Caesar***s keen mind foresaw that the whole movement was but the prelude of the play, and sooner or later the whole region would rise and move as one great tide over the borders of the empire. The beginning must be stopped once for all. Some commentators have argued the emptiness of Caesar***s excuse of opposition to the Helvetii, and have said that, instead of being nearer to the Roman dominions, the emigrants in question would be still further away. In respect to miles, as the crow flies, this claim is true, virtually it is absurd. As Cicero onceOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAII4said, the gods placed the Alps to shelter Rome in her weakness. Helvetia lay beyond that barrier, while on the far west, from the northern bank of the mouth of the Garonne, whither the emigrants were making, to the borders of the Province, was a stretch of only a hundred miles of open country. To cross this would be, for any warring party of horse, but the casting of a pebble."

"NOT FOUND"|"Venientes : Who were these ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"As to the history of the Helvetii after their melancholy return, there is reason to believe they never recovered. Caesar speaks of them again in the battle of Alesia, about six years later (b.c. 52), wrhen they sent 8,000 troops. It is probable they were assimilated into the German tribes, which settled slowly in Helvetia. To-day, Switzerland is largely Germanic."

"NOT FOUND"|"In the choice of this man, who must have awakened in any patriotic Roman the most bitter and revengeful thoughts, some writers have questioned both the wisdom and the motive of the Helvetians. If they hoped or cared for amnesty, it was certainly unwise if not indelicate to offer overtures through a man so identified with the offences of the past. Rather is the question of motive probable. We can understand how Caesar***s sudden appearance writh an army of six legions, or 25,000 disciplined men, whereas when last seen he had only one, momentarily startled the enemy into this conference, but still, mingling with and overtopping their anxiety, were a certain disregard and contempt of a foe $0 inferior in numbers. It wereOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESwell, they thought, to remind the Roman leader in their rear, that the Helvetii had done something in the past and were not to be despised in the present."

"NOT FOUND"|"A favorite site for a camp was the slope of a hill (sub colley subTHE BEGINNER'S CALSARmonte), with wood, water, and grass in abundance near by. In Book II, chapter 18, Caesar describes the natural features of the location of a certain camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"The eloquence he showed at Rome, in his earlier career, in the prosecution of certain cases of impeachment, wron him a considerable interest, and his engaging address and conversation gained the hearts of his people."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CEESARChapter XXVSUO equo : Plutarch says: *** When he had drawn his forces up, as described, his horse was brought to him. Upon which he said, *** When I have won the battle, I shall want my horse for the pursuit; at present let us march, as we are, against the enemy.*** ***Again, at the battle of Munda, Caesar ordered his horse taken to the rear. May one reason for this have been his solicitude for his horse? (See Notes to chapter 7.) Was he a skillful rider?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Did Divitiacus understand Latin?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ipso and eius: These both refer to Divitiacus. In chapter 16, the student will remember that Divitiacus is mentioned as being summoned to the meeting, eo : To whom does this refer?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ab Helvetiis pulsum : After the Cimbri had defeated the Roman consul, Papirius Carbo, in Noricum, b. c. i 13, they turned westward and instigated the Helvetii to similar action."

"NOT FOUND"|"To see what this general scheme was will help the pupil to comprehend the political situation in Gaul at this time. The ALdui seem to have inherited the Celtic leadership of old, and the Romans, in their desire to extend their power over Gaul, had taken them under their protection. But this subtle influence was resisted, not only by tribes quite as strong as the ALdui, but even by parties within tribes nominally favorable to Rome, even within the iEdui themselves. The national spirit was not dead in Gaul. Everywhere the patriots, proud of their independence, rankling against the fetters Rome was slowly forging for them, were at work marshalling their strength within and without their country, soliciting assistance from whatever source, even from the Germans. As Caesar tells us in Book VI, chapters n and 12, in every district, in every hamlet, were these two factions, one in sympathy with Rome, the other bitterly averse to all foreign interference, each seeking external assistance, looking for friends beyond the confines of their own country. The prowess of the Helvetii, and especially their experience in warfare with both Roman and German, made them especially welcome to the national or patriotic party. Their presence would be a most desirable acquisition in a struggle for maintenance of Gallic independence. Thus, since the party of the patriots was now everywhere ascendant, the entry of this hardy people was easily effected, being an important part of the general scheme to resist the encroachment of the Romans."

"NOT FOUND"|"praestare . . . erepturi: These were the favorite arguments of the national party. (See Notes to chapter 9.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Oceano: This means the Atlantic, and especially that part adjacent to France, now called the Bay of Biscay."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boii: These were properly a Gallic tribe, although at this time rather widely scattered and homeless, many being in Germany, just across the Rhine. Schweizer-Sidler is authority for the statement that the Gauls in Germany were a remnant left behind in the great Aryan migration from east to west."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die FRUMENTUM MILITIBUS metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"frumentum militibus metiri: The regular food was coarse flour, or unground wheat or barley, which the soldier himself must grind. Every fifteen days he received two modiiy or pecks. Each day heOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CAESARground about two pounds and boiled it into a thick paste, or made a kind of unleavened bread. Any other food or delicacy had to be obtained by foraging, or bought of the merchants (mercatores), who always followed the army in large numbers."

"NOT FOUND"|"Rauraci, Tulingi, Latobrigi: It will be profitable for the pupil to take a good map of modern Europe and locate the regions occupied by these early people. The Rauraci were near Basle; the Tulingi, near Schaffhausen ; the Latobrigi, in the Black Forest (Schwarzwald). Notice the repetition of the conjunction et; this is called polysyndeton."

"NOT FOUND"|"The Ambarri and Allobroges: Caesar speaks of them in terms showing that they had been utterly ravaged, since through this region the whole multitude had passed. The iEdui were yet to feel the full and complete effect of the onslaught. They were crying out more in fear of the coming storm."

"NOT FOUND"|"Bibracte: Now identified with Mont Beuvray, a considerable elevation of about 3,000 feet, in the highlands of Nivernais, about ten miles west of Autun. Scholars formerly placed Bibracte on the site of Autun, but this opinion was changed as a result of the investigations of Napoleon III of France in 1865, as already mentioned inOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CsESARthese Notes. He showed that the Gauls usually chose for their towns places difficult of access, either on rugged elevations, or in the midst of extensive marshes, which were so abundant in France in those days. In Book III, Caesar gives an elaborate account of the sites of the towns of the Veneti, on the wTest coast, and how difficult it was for him to reach them. Napoleon traced several ancient roads leading to the summit of Mont Beuvray, and on excavation found there the remains of foundations of Gallic walls and towTers."

"NOT FOUND"|"The A**dui: Why these people were especially despoiled, and with what confidence they could send appeals to Caesar, as here related, the pupil will readily understand from what has already been given in these notes."

"NOT FOUND"|"Let the pupil now consider how Caesar had come to be so concerned in Gallic affairs*that word was brought directly to him. It was the custom to grant to the consuls, at the close of their term of office, the governorship of some province, for one year, with the title of proconsul. Caesar had just finished his year as consul (b. c. 59). He was the ablest Roman living, not excepting the great Pompey, who had achieved undying fame in his swift victory over the pirates of the Mediterranean and over Mithridates, the scourge of the East. Now, again, good service would be rendered Rome if she were relieved of fear of Gaul and German, who were hovering *** like an ominous cloud charged with forces of uncertain magnitude,*** the partial strength and fury of which Italy had already more than once seen in action."

"NOT FOUND"|"In this chapter Caesar states fully why he was so opposed to the emigration of the Helvetii. Some writers are inclined to discredit him, and feel that his reasons were but pretexts for interference, disguising his real purpose of extending Roman sovereignty over Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"Thus, the outlines of the camp having been already marked out with great accuracy, no time was lost after the arrival of the army; laying aside all instruments of war, the soldiers began to dig a ditch or moat (fossa), about nine feet wide and six feet deep. With this earth they built also a wall {vallum), usually about six feet above the level of the ground, and six or eight feet broad on the top, to enable standing-room for the soldiers in event of an assault on the camp. To strengthen the defenses, branches of trees, stakes, and even logs were imbedded and the sides covered with sods, and along the outer edge of the top was a line of green stakes driven into the ground, and the branches intertwined, rising four or five feet above the top, and forming a breastwork. For a cross-section view of this complete structure, see cut on page 44."

"NOT FOUND"|"mons: What mountain ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"The legionlegiones: All legionary soldiers were milites gravis armaturae, *** soldiers with heavy armor.***The number of men in a legion is variously estimated from 3,000 to 5,000. This contrariety is probably due to the fact that the dead and disabled were not replaced; so the older the legion in service, the smaller it became. Instead of recruits in a veteran legion, new legions wTere enrolled. In Caesar***s legions in Gaul, it is generallyOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESagreed with Riistow that each contained 3,600 men. Each legion contained ten cohorts of 360 men each, each cohort three maniples of 120 each, each maniple two centuries of sixty each. In legions thus reduced in number below the normal, the century was often called ordo."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXI***Officers of a Roman army1.	Dux belli: Before entering upon the duties of his new office, the commander in chief took the vows in the Capitol, and assumed the paludamentum, or cloak of scarlet wool, gold-embroidered, as token of his imperium militare. His title was dux belli, but after his first victory he received, from his soldiers, the courteous appellation of imperator."

"petit atque hortatur ut sine eius offensione animi vel ipse de eo CAUSA COGNITA statuat vel civitatem statuere iubeat."|"causa cognita: Let the student be always careful in the translation of the ablative absolute. Never render it literally. Never sacrifice one***s own tongue to any foreign idiom. Render this: *** after trying the case.***Chapter XXFind an example of euphemism in this chapter. Let the pupil compare carefully the direct and the indirect discourse of the speech of Divitiacus, and be prepared to convert the one into the other at dictation in class."

"NOT FOUND"|"fines Lingonum: This region lies north of Mont Beuvray; it is now called Champagne. Scholars have sometimes located the end of the flight of the Helvetii at Langres, about ninety miles from Mont Beuvray, but Napoleon makes it at Tonnerre, sixty miles west of Langres."

"NOT FOUND"|"*** The chief was either hereditary or elected, or won his command by the sword. The mass of the people were serfs. The best fighters were self-made nobles, under the chief***s authority. Every man in the tribe was the chief***s absolute subject; the chief, in turn, was bound to protect the meanest of them against injury from without. War, on a large scale or a small, had been the occupation of their lives. When the call to arms went out, every man of the required age was expected at the muster, and the last comer was tortured to death in the presence of his comrades as a lesson against backwardness.*** Thus we see a rude resemblance to feudalism."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesar placed little dependence upon his cavalry, using them rather for scouting purposes, and to harass an enemy***s line of march. In actual conflict they proved unstable, as shown in chapters 15 and 24. Their presence, too, gave a show of numbers."

"NOT FOUND"|"After the Roman fashion, these revenues were *** farmed out,*** that is, the privilege of collecting them was sold at auction. The buyer then made all collections, and kept for himself as profit all money remaining over the price which he bid and paid to the State. Often the successful bidder would sublet certain districts to various individuals, these underlings being the ***publicans*** mentioned in the New Testament."

"NOT FOUND"|"His style is a recognized model of unadorned narration, pure, graceful, easy. Even in his story of the Civil War, of which he wras by far the largest part, there is not the slightest trace of strutting or boasting, no straining for effect, no malice, bitterness, or invective, naught but the simple yet eloquent story, told wTith his usual strong but subdued emotion."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boii et Tulingi: Semi-Germanic tribes. Explain how they came to be in the migration (chapter 5). They had been in the van of the line of march thus far; show how they were now in the rear."

"NOT FOUND"|"Mercatores, or *** Italian traders ***: Caesar tells us that the Belgians were yet untouched by Roman civilization, they being too remote for the visits of the Italian traders, coming up from Marseilles along the natural highway of the Rhone, the Saone, and then the Loire. But upon the great and open central portion, the land of the Celts, was being dumped, from pack-horse, mule, or cart, every luxury of the Roman epicure *** and with it all, slowly, the attendant vices. The most common article of traffic was the sparkling southern wines, for which, it is said, these people would barter their sons."

"NOT FOUND"|"sororem ex matre: *** A half sister, on his mother***s side.***Divitiacus :	He had long been a personal friend of Caesar. Hehad been in Rome several times before Caesar came to Gaul. It was he who went in person to notify the Roman Senate of the inroads of the Germans in B.c. 63, and again of the proposed exodus of the Helvetii. Hence the deference and affection which Caesar shows him in chapter 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"The long delay here shows that Caesar***s army had likewise suffered sorely."

"NOT FOUND"|"Thus, the cavalry is to be regarded as of two kinds: one formingOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESa regular part of the legion, hence often called legionarii equites, the other being a distinct body, and usually retaining its native dress and equipment and manner of fighting. Both were completely foreign."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XIVCaesar***s reply: Let the pupils take advantage of this opportunity to study Caesar as an orator. It is advised that the student write this speech to Divico in the most eloquent and forcible English that he can command."

"NOT FOUND"|"Labienus: Was he really, or only nominally,praetor, as he stood there on the summit at dawn, watching in vain for Caesar ? Why ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"3.	Quaestor: The quaestor, or quartermaster, was elected by the people annually to accompany the army and attend to the financial affairs. He took charge of the military treasure-chest, and supervised the supplies and equipment of the soldiers. He also rated and disposed of the booty."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XIiam: ***By this time.*** Napoleon III estimated that Caesar was absent on his recruiting expedition around Aquileia about 40 days. During this time, the Helvetii had marched but about 100 miles, that is, from Geneva, via the pass of the Jura, to Macon on the Saone. But it is also estimated that the line of march was 50 miles long. Hence at the time of Caesar***s return, the van of the enemy was well into the ./Eduan country beyond the river, at least to Chalons. In the next chapter, he says three-fourths were already beyond the river."

"caesar, quod memoria tenebat l. cassium consulem occisum exercitumque eius ab helvetiis pulsum et SUB IUGUM missum, concedendum non putabat;  neque homines inimico animo, data facultate per provinciam itineris faciundi, temperaturos ab iniuria et maleficio existimabat."|"sub iugum: *** under the yoke.*** This ceremony was the usual token of surrender. Livy, the greatest contemporary Roman historian, the personal friend of the Caesars, the Gibbon-Macaulay of his day, describes the construction of the yoke as follows : ***Tribus hastis iugum fit; humi fixis duabus, superque eas transversa una deligata.*** Under this the defeated army marched. Note our word subjugate."

"qui cupidius novissimum agmen insecuti alieno loco cum equitatu helvetiorum proelium committunt; et pauci DE NOSTRIS cadunt."|"de nostris; This is pointed out as being the beginning of those changes, chiefly declensional, which have produced the modern Romance tongues of Italy, France, and Spain."

"NOT FOUND"|"captivis: What officer had charge of booty ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ut arbitrantur: Notice that ut is often used with the indicative in the sense of *** as.***Chapter Vquod constituerant: This means the emigration. At first the older men had opposed the project, but they had at last been overruled by the less cautious and less experienced younger element. Thus, prudence and wisdom of age gave way to the indiscretion and enthusiasm of youth, and again to the unfortunate people was to come a repetition of the reverses of Aix, forty years before."

"NOT FOUND"|"The fact that it lacked yet about two and one-half hours of dawn explains how Caesar could hope to gain his vantage-ground unseen It also helps to excuse the blunder of Considius mentioned in the next chapter."

"eadem secreto ab aliis quaerit; reperit esse vera:  ipsum esse dumnorigem, summa audacia, magna apud plebem propter liberalitatem gratia, cupidum RERUM NOVARUM."|"rerum novarum: Usual expression for a political revolution. The frequency of such uprisings and changes among semi-barbarian people may be easily understood. The world has not yet outgrowm them. Recent South American history is replete with fit examples. Likewise, in the late overthrow of the Obrenovitch dynasty in Servia, consummated by the murder of the king and queen and their adherents, and the immediate establishment of a liberal constitutional government, the student finds a striking similarity to the violent coup d'Jtats of old.NOTESFarming the revenuesportoria: These were duties or customs collected on imports and exports on the frontier, and on goods passing through the country, whether by land or water. Sometimes these tolls were levied by blackmail, i.e. by force, threats, or intimidation. The A**dui were especially well situated for the collection of large revenues, since by bridge tolls they controlled a considerable part of the Saone, which was the main water route into central Gaul from Marseilles."

"NOT FOUND"|"Orgetorigis filia : With whom was she in camp ?"

"romani CONVERSA SIGNA bipertito intulerunt: prima et secunda acies, ut victis ac submotis resisteret, tertia, ut venientes sustineret."|"conversa signa : This refers only to the third battle line. What cohorts ? What cohorts were engaged with the main body of the Helvetii ? (See diagram in Notes to chapter 24.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XIIde tertia vigilia : From midnight to 3 a.m. (see Vocabulary). Tigurini: These were one of the Gallic tribes or districts, whomOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CjESARthe Cimbri persuaded to join in the invasion of Italy. They assisted in the defeat of the consular army of Junius Silanus in 109 B.c. and of that of Cassius in 107 b.c. Hence Caesar***s exultation that fate had reserved for him the vengeance."

"NOT FOUND"|"Verbigenus : How many cantons composed the state of Helvetia ? Name two.THE BEGINNER'S CAESARThis district lay between modern Berne and Lucerne, multitudine dediticiorum: What was the number of prisonersof war ? (See text of chapter 26.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"decurionis : What was his command in the army ? (See Notes to chapter 15.)"

"caesari cum id nuntiatum esset, eos per provinciam nostram iter facere conari, MATURAT AB urbe proficisci et quam maximis potest itineribus in galliam ulteriorem contendit et ad genavam pervenit."|"Maturat ab urbe: When urbs is alone, that is, without its apposi- tive of the particular city, it means Rome."

"NOT FOUND"|"sarcinas : The personal baggage of the legionary. On the march he carried his own food supply, cooking utensils, blanket, and one or two rampart stakes. This luggage was done up in a bundle and suspended from a forked pole, which he carried over his shoulder. The pole was forked, like a crutch, and served much the same purpose to a weary soldier, standing at rest. Marius devised this, and hence the phrase, the *** mules of Marius.*** The entire weight of this individual luggage, or sarcinae, was often fully sixty pounds."

"de tertia vigilia t. labienum, legatum pro praetore, cum duabus legionibus et iis ducibus qui iter cognoverant summum iugum montis ascendere iubet; QUID SUI consilii sit ostendit."|"quid sui consilii sit: His plan may be inferred from the errand of the scouts. What was this errand ? Caesar planned a flank movement, that is, to pass around to the rear, and occupy the heights above the enemy, who lay encamped at the base.	*	."

"NOT FOUND"|"Divico: As Caesar says, he had been a leader of the Helvetii in the Cimbri invasion, when Cassius was defeated, 107 B.c. The year was now 58 b.c., making the event 49 years before. Thus was Divico an old man, and probably the oldest among them in military experience. This was probably the reason why he was chosen envoy on this occasion."

"NOT FOUND"|"pons: This is mentioned, since the Helvetii planned to cross it into the land of the Allobroges. Hence, Caesar***s first act was to destroy it (see chapter VII)."

"helvetios, tulingos, latobrigos in fines suos, unde erant profecti, reverti iussit, et, quod omnibus frugibus amissis domi nihil erat quo famem tolerarent, allobrogibus imperavit ut iis frumenti copiam facerent; ipsos OPPIDA VICOSQUE, quos incenderant, restituere iussit."|"oppida vicosque: Whose towns and villages ? How many of each ? (See chapter 5.) What is the difference between oppidum andvicus ?"

"concurrunt reliquarum civitatium legati, quae bellovacorum speculabantur eventum;  OBSIDES DANT, imperata faciunt excepto commio, quem timor prohibebat cuiusquam fidei suam committere salutem."|"obsides dant: This fact shows the utter decomposition and alienation of the Gallic people as well as their extreme barbarism, since this guaranty of a peaceful passage was deemed necessary. This proved to be a wise foresight of the Sequani, when the passing throng reached the land beyond. (See chapter 11.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"diebus viginti: This shows us how long the Helvetii were crossing the river."

"NOT FOUND"|"animadverto: What is the literal meaning of this word? What is its inferred meaning ? What is such studied toning of harsh thought called ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"6.	Below the centurions and above the common soldier, or *** private,*** were privileged classes; as veterans, reenlisted men, orderlies, standard bearers, musicians, etc."

"die constituta causae dictionis orgetorix ad iudicium omnem suam familiam, ad hominum milia decem, undique coegit, et omnes clientes obaeratosque suos, quorum magnum numerum habebat, eodem conduxit; per eos ne causam diceret SE ERIPUIT."|"se eripuit: Exactly how he effected this is not explained. Some commentators say that the large retinue of the accused man awed the court to silence."

"NOT FOUND"|"murum fossamque perducit: Thus entrance into the Province was prevented, but the way to the west still lay open through the Pas de l***Ecluse. Caesar***s force was small. He must replenish it. Leaving Labienus to guard the newly constructed line of defenses along the south bank of the Rhone, he set out for Italy. But before he could return with his five new legions, the enemy had accomplished their exodus through the Sequani, and were plundering and ravaging the land of the ^Edui, as given in chapters 9, 10 and 11 following."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter IVEa res: The conspiracy."

"NOT FOUND"|"Noreia; Modern site of Neumarkt, about one hundred miles southwest of Vienna."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesar as a writer: While this thought of Caesar as an orator is in our minds, it may be well to add a few' words to complete the general topic of Caesar as a man of letters. Only a small part of his writings is extant, their loss being perhaps assignable to the bigotry of the time succeeding Augustus, when the law of majestas w***as revived and extended to include defamatory writing, and there may have been much in Caesar***s works offensive to a narrow imperialism like that of Tiberius. Among these lost works may be mentioned the Anti-Cato, written in reply to the eulogy which Cicero published on the death of that zealous and conservative censor. There is much to be admired in Cato***s honor and integrity and stern insistence upon the preservation of the old time virtue. He is the Cato of whom Portia boasts of being fathered. He sided with Pompey in the Civil War, and hence was an enemy to Csesar. It is to be greatly regretted that Caesar***s reply is lost."

"NOT FOUND"|"(Aeduorum) precibus abductus: In chapter n, Caesar told us that the iEdui sent envoys to ask aid of him against the Helvetii."

"erant omnino itinera duo, quibus itineribus domo exire possent: unum per sequanos, angustum et difficile, inter montem iuram et flumen rhodanum, vix qua singuli carri ducerentur, mons autem altissimus impendebat, ut facile perpauci prohibere possent;   alterum per provinciam nostram, multo facilius atque expeditius, propterea quod inter fines helvetiorum et allobrogum, qui nuper pacati erant, rhodanus fluit isque non nullis locis VADO TRANSITUR."|"Vado transitur: Caesar says there were fords at some places. Now there is only one, and that is only a few miles down from Geneva. The river is very swift, and thus probably its current has worn away the bed. From Lyons to almost the mouth, the current is so strong that only the largest steamers can navigate it."

"caesar, etsi a bello atque hoste discedere detrimentosum esse existimabat, tamen non ignorans quanta ex dissensionibus incommoda oriri consuessent, ne tanta et tam coniuncta populo romano civitas, quam IPSE SEmper aluisset omnibusque rebus ornasset, ad vim atque arma descenderet, atque ea pars quae minus sibi confideret auxilia a vercingetorige arcesseret,  huic rei praevertendum existimavit et, quod legibus aeduorum eis, qui summum magistra tum obtinerent, excedere ex finibus non liceret, ne quid de iure aut de legibus eorum deminuisse videretur, ipse in aeduos proficisci statuit senatumque omnem et quos inter controversia esset ad se decetiam evocavit."|"ipse, se, suam, sese: All these refer to Divitiacus, the speaker, ille: This refers to the one remote, i.e. to the one spoken of, Dumnorix."

"NOT FOUND"|"Provinciae . . . legio una: Caesar went by way of Marseilles, where he probably had left a legion on his return to Rome from Spain, one year before. This was the legion which was to become the famous *** tenth.*** Then, after levying other troops, he hurried on, reaching the vicinity of Geneva in eight days (Plutarch)."

"erant omnino itinera duo, quibus itineribus domo exire possent: unum per sequanos, angustum et difficile, inter montem iuram et flumen rhodanum, vix qua singuli carri ducerentur, mons autem altissimus impendebat, ut facile perpauci prohibere possent;   alterum PER PROVINCIAM nostram, multo facilius atque expeditius, propterea quod inter fines helvetiorum et allobrogum, qui nuper pacati erant, rhodanus fluit isque non nullis locis vado transitur."|"per provinciam nostram: This really means the land of the Allobroges, south and southeast of Geneva, being now called Dauphin^ and Savoie."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ocelum: The modern site of this towm is not known. Certainly, it wTas very near, if not quite, where Brian^n now stands. Some suggest, rather, the city of Grenoble, pop. 65,000, situated at the confluence of the Is6re and the Drac, in the magnificent plain of Graisivaudan, surrounded by imposing mountains."

"NOT FOUND"|"intervallo: At what distance did Caesar follow the enemy? (See chapter 15.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesar was not merely a great general. As Chateaubriand once declared, he is the most complete man of all history; his genius was transcendent in three respects *** in statecraft, in war, and in literature and eloquence."

"NOT FOUND"|"Now again was the need of an able man. The Senate, as usual, was lethargic. The people, however, were spurred by personal anxiety and fear to something of the old fire. It was they who had urged the matter of Pompey***s mission, mentioned above, and now again they were to make no mistake in their choice of a man to care for their interests on the northern frontier. They played their hand with a vengeance, and instead of the usual one year, they determined to send Caesar as proconsul or governor of Gaul for five years. The choice of Caesar may be largely attributed to his popularity. He was the idol of the people, who seem to have come to feel that with him naught was impossible, in him *** was the divine majesty of gods, who are the masters of kings.*** It was a case of prejudiced choice; for, as Froude says, *** No Roman general was ever sent upon an enterprise so fraught with complicated possibilities, and few with less experience of the realities of war.***Thus to Caesar, as the newly appointed governor of Gaul, wasTHE BEGINNER'S CAESARbrought word of a condition of affairs requiring his immediatepresence."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter VIitinera: *** There were only two ways by which they could leave home.*** If the pupil will examine a good modern map, he will see how effectually the ways to the south and west were blocked. Nature has raised an almost unbroken barrier about that little country. Along the south and southwest tower the highest ridges and peaks of the whole Alps, including the famous Rosa, St. Gothard, Great St. Bernard, Finster Aarhom, Jungfrau, and the highest of all *** Mt. Blanc. To the west stood the then impassable Jura range. Whether the comparatively open route down the Rhine, along the base of the Vosges, was considered or not we are not informed. One may infer that it was rejected, because of its long and tedious circuit through a country particularly hostile."

"NOT FOUND"|"exploratoribus: Soldiers, sent out for scouting purposes, were called speculatores, if alone; if in parties, exploratores."

"ipse DE QUARTA vigilia eodem itinere quo hostes ierant ad eos contendit equitatumque omnem ante se mittit."|"de quarta vigilia: The fourth watch had begun when Caesar commenced his march. As the night watch began at sunset and continued until sunrise, and as the night was divided into four watches, the student must know the season of year to determine the exact hours of any given watch. Estimating the number of night hours, and dividing by four, we obtain the length of a watch, from which the time of any watch is easily determined. For exam-Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESple: It was about the first of July, the sun setting at 7.29 and rising at 4.38. If Caesar started about the beginning of the fourth watch, wtiat W'as the approximate hour of the night ? (Answer: About 2 A. M.) Using the almanac, let the teacher give like examples."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTESbetween this word and regnum. The latter was distinctly political necessarily involving official position and authority, a power conferred by the tribe. The principatum was the prerogative of one bom to rank and wealth, being a position of prominence without constitutional or official power. This distinction seems to be confirmed by the case of Dumnorix. He already possessed the principatum, and was induced to try for the regnum, that is, the political sovereignty. (See notes to chapter 19, principatum!)"

"NOT FOUND"|"Each * dux belli had a quaestor."

"capto monte et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et novissimis praesidio erant, ex itinere nostros ab LATERE APERTO adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"latere aperto: *** on the exposed flank.*** As the shield was carried on the left arm, which side would be the ***exposed flank ***?"

"id ea MAXIME RATIONE fecit, quod noluit eum locum unde helvetii discesserant vacare, ne propter bonitatem agrorum germani, qui trans rhenum incolunt, ex suis finibus in helvetiorum fines transirent et finitimi galliae provinciae allobrogibusque essent."|"maxime ratione: ***chiefly for this reason,*** as explained in the quod clause following. Only about 100,000 people returned to their mountain home in Helvetia, where 300,000 had been before, and where 3,000,000 are to-day. Even these 100,000 were in large part broken-hearted women and children, a petty restraint to a horde of Germans. But this little colony, whom Caesar could now rely upon to remain quiet and contented at home for another fifty years, was better on that treacherous frontier than no colony at all. And yet, history does show us that little by little the Germans did creep into that region, and were ready to issue into Gaul and Italy in concert with the entire Teutonic north, to wrest from Rome her possessions, carry pillage through her very streets, and leave the Western Roman Empire but a shadow of being."

"NOT FOUND"|"quinque legiones: There w'as already one legion on the Rhone ***with Labienus. This made six legions, or about 25,000 men, now under Caesar***s command, besides some native recruits of Gallic cavalry."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original frorr NIVERSITY OFTHE BEGINNER'S CAISAR5.	 Centuriones: These were the real leaders of the soldiers. Their position was like that of captain, sergeant, and corporal com** bined. They were of humble birth, and promoted solely because of fighting qualities. They were the pride and envy of the common soldier; their office, the goal of his ambition."

"NOT FOUND"|"The truth of the above analysis seems to be confirmed by two or three facts: In the conference, they themselves dictated terms of settlement, and when these were displaced by Caesar***s own, they broke off the negotiations and continued on their way, as though nothing had happened. Again, when Caesar temporarily changed his tactics, as mentioned in chapter 23, the enemy readily construed it as due to fear."

"NOT FOUND"|"Max. pot. itineribus: He travelled sometimes a hundred miles a day, either walking at the head of his legions, or mounted on his own favorite horse, which would suffer no one but his master to mount him, or borne in his litter while dictating to four or sometimes seven amanuenses *** reading, writing, dictating, and listening all at once. ***Under the rains of Gaul, swimming its rivers, climbing its mountains on foot, and making his bed among rains and snows in its forests and morasses,*** of which Michelet, Suetonius, and Plutarch all tell us, he spared himself none of the hardships of the common soldier."

"NOT FOUND"|"ex Helvetiis uxorem: Who was the wife of Dumnorix? (See chapter 3.)"

"NOT FOUND"|"igitized by GoogleTHE BEGINNER'S CjESARThus, nature conspired with man and matter to force a conflict between Gaul and Roman. So down the lake to Geneva they were to go. At that point a choice of way opened: they might cross the bridge at Geneva into the country of the Allobroges, who, although under Roman dominion, were not loyal to the master. Their way would then be through country easy to traverse; or, they might continue down the river along its northern bank and emerge into an open country, through the narrow defile where the river bends around the southern limb of the Jura. This way was at last forced upon them. This defile or pass is now called the Pas de l***Ecluse, and is situated on the line of railway from Paris to Geneva, via Micon, about an hour***s ride out of Geneva. An idea of the wildness of this region may be gained from the fact that a tunnel of two and one-half miles has been constructed to avoid one of the most difficult parts."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWATHE BEGINNER'S CAlSARChapter IXSequanis invitis: However willing the Sequani might be to see the Helvetii in their neighbors*** territories, they objected to the presence, in their own, of such a flight of devouring locusts. Evidently, however, there was some general scheme, of which the entry of the Helvetii into Gaul was an essential part; thus, the Sequani were induced to agree (Froude)."

"NOT FOUND"|"The region had been subjugated in b. c. 121. It had revolted and was again pacified by Pomptinus in B. c. 61, and made a part of the Roman Province, the proconsular authority thus being extended quite to Geneva."

"NOT FOUND"|"*** Among the iEdui, too, there w*ere fiery spirits who cherished the old traditions, and saw in the Roman alliance a prelude to annexa-tion."

"NOT FOUND"|"condonare: What is the literal meaning of this word ? The literal meaning accounts for its double object."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUID vellent, ad id."|"si quid accidat Romanis: This softened expression of a harsh thought is called euphemism. Translate: *** in case of any disaster to the Romans.***proelium equestre adversum: The unsuccessful cavalry skirmish, mentioned in chapter 15, is thus explained as due to the treachery of Dumnorix. Review topic Cavalry in Notes to chapter 15."

"NOT FOUND"|"principem : One enjoying a principatum, i.e., *** a leading and influential man.*** (See Notes to chapter 3 )"

"NOT FOUND"|"A Gallicis armis : *** from,*** an unusual meaning, since it contains the idea of means, which does not admit the preposition."

"NOT FOUND"|"Besides this, he wrote treatises on philosophy, language, natural science, and augury. Nor did he disdain verse. He wrote a Latin grammar to amuse himself as he led an army over the Alps. He even wrote a book on the motion of the stars."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XVIpropter frigora; *** On account of the frosts.***It was now at least the middle of June, and the region was south of the central part of France. This leads us to believe that the climate of sunny France has changed since Caesar***s day. This change may have come from cutting down the extensive forests, and draining the marshes, which Caesar often mentions, frumenta : In the plural, this means *** standing grain.*** pabuli: green fodder. Why was there not much for Caesar? ab Arare: The Helvetii had left the river, making westerly into the valley of the Ixfire."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter VIICaesari: Notice that this is the first mention of Caesar. It is peculiar that he, the writer, speaks of himself, the actor, always in the third person, as though he were writing of another."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter XXVIIquo tum essent: Where were the Helvetii at this time ?"

"ex eo proelio circiter hominum milia cxxx superfuerunt eaque tota nocte continenter ierunt [nullam partem noctis itinere intermisso]; in fines lingonum die quarto pervenerunt, cum et propter vulnera militum et propter SEPULTURAM OCCISORUM nostri [triduum morati] eos sequi non potuissent."|"sepulturam occisorum: The burial of the dead was a most sacred duty. The Romans believed that the spirit of the unburied roamed aimlessly on the banks of the Styx, unable to gain entrance to the land of rest."

"NOT FOUND"|"Describe the form and defenses of a Roman camp. Name one particular purpose of a Roman camp, which in modem warfare it does not serve. (See Notes to chapter 15.)"

"CAPTO MONTE et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et novissimis praesidio erant, ex itinere nostros ab latere aperto adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"capto monte: ***When the mountain was reached,*** i.e., by the enemy."

