"helvetii cum omnibus suis carris secuti impedimenta in unum locum contulerunt; ipsi confertissima acie, reiecto nostro equitatu, phalange facta SUB PRIMAM nostram aciem successerunt."|"sub primam nostram aciem : up to (up the hill to) our front line, i.e. the lowest or front line of cohorts. < Notice the force of sub with the accusative, under, from under, up to."

"NOT FOUND"|"decurionis: see 85."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with the corresponding sentence in Caesar; note and explain changes. Observe that the future passive indicative pellentur becomes in the indirect discourse the periphrastic future passive infinitive, futurum esse uti pellerentur. H. 619, 2; LM. 984; A. 288,/; G. 248; B. 270, 3; (H. 537. 3)-paucis annis: in a few years; ablative of time in which. H. 487; LM. 631; A. 256; G. 393; B. 231; (H. 429)."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. eorum: i.e. of the tribes above mentioned."

"NOT FOUND"|"iis contraria: opposite to these; contraria agrees with tigna, to be supplied after duo = bina; duo is admissible in this instance, because the meaning is perfectly clear from bina, in 1. 14 above."

"quibus proeliis calamitatibusque fractos, qui et sua virtute et populi romani hospitio atque amicitia plurimum ante in gallia potuissent, coactos esse sequanis obsides dare nobilissimos civitatis et iure iurando civitatem obstringere sese neque obsides repetituros neque auxilium a populo romano imploraturos NEQUE RECUSATUROS quo minus perpetuo sub illorum dicione atque imperio essent."|"neque recusaturos quo minus, etc.: nor refuse to be, etc., lit. by which they should not (less) be. H. 568,8; LM. 909; A. 317, bt N. 1; G. 549; B. 295, 3; (H. 497, II)."

"ipse autem ariovistus tantos sibi spiritus, tantam arrogantiam sumpserat, UT FERENDUS non videretur."|"12. ut ferendus non videretur: construe non with ferendus, that he seemed unendurable.	Explain mood in videretur."

"NOT FOUND"|"Romam . . .venisse: this was in the year 61 B.c. Diviciacus was kindly received, but no aid was granted at the time."

"NOT FOUND"|"18. ut . *** . USUS . . . videretur: that it might be seen that he showedclemency, etc., lit. that he might be seen to have shown, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. in Italiam: i.e. into Cisalpine Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"ei... qui ... non auderet: to one who did not dare, etc.; a severe criticism of the cowardice of Volusenus."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. his: explain case."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES*** BOOK III, 9-13Page 134, line 1. *** extruso mari . . . molibus: by means of embank* ments Caesar connected these towns with the mainland so that they could be approached by land at any time. How he did this, he does not tell us, but he probably extended two parallel dikes or dams from the mainland to the towns, closing them in at low tide so as to leave the space between them quite dry. This is the explanation of General von Goler."

"is ita cum caesare egit: si pacem populus romanus cum helvetiis faceret, in eam partem ituros atque ibi futuros helvetios ubi eos caesar constituisset atque esse voluisset;  sin bello persequi perseveraret, reminisceretur et VETERIS INCOMMODI populi romani et pristinae virtutis helvetiorum."|"veteris incommodi: this refers to the defeat of Cassius. H. 454; LM. 588; A. 219, i; G. 376; B. 206, 1; (H. 406, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES *** BOOK I, 15-17se diutias duci: that he was put off too long."

"NOT FOUND"|"Explain the subjunctives in this chapter."

"NOT FOUND"|"attigisset, dedidissent: should touchy should surrender ; future perfect in the direct discourse."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est,] NON MODO frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"non modo: not only not H. 656, 3; A. 149, e; G. 482, R. 1; B. 343, 2, a; (H. 552, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"id: the object of contendere, explained by the object clause of purpose, ne ea... enuntiarentur, in apposition with it.CAESAR***S GALLIC WAR5. dixissent, enuntiatum esset: remember that the future perfect in a subordinate clause of the direct discourse is changed in the indirect into the pluperfect subjunctive after an historical tense; see note on constituisset, z, luisset, p. 65,1. 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"propterea . . . haberent: explain mood; see propterea . . . obtenturus esset, p. 58,1. 11."

"haec si enuntiata ariovisto sint, non dubitare QUIN DE omnibus obsidibus qui apud eum sint gravissimum supplicium sumat."|"quin de omnibus .. . sumat: that he would inflict the severest punishment upon all, etc.; cf. quin . . . possent, p. 58, 1. 13. Observe the Latin idiom, supplicium sumere de, to take satisfaction or pay from, instead of to inflict punishment upon."

"NOT FOUND"|"Baculus, primi pili centurio : see ii, 25, where he is called primipilus > another name for primi pili centurio ; see 81."

"NOT FOUND"|"H. 570; LM. 905; A. 319; G. 552; B. 284; (H. 500, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... teneretur: who assigns this reason? Note that obsidibus without ab is simply an ablative of means, not of agent."

"NOT FOUND"|"populi Romani hospitio atque amicitia: for almost three quarters of a century the Haedui had been allies and friends of the Roman people. Hospitium between two independent states denotes the relation of host and guest, requiring that each should extend to the other the rites of hospitality in the persons of their representatives and ambassadors; amicitia is a still stronger bond, requiring each state to adopt a friendly policy wherever the interests of the other are concerned; societas, a definite alliance, is the strongest bond that can exist between states."

"NOT FOUND"|"milium: predicate genitive with erat. H. 447; LM. 556; A. 214, c; G. 366; B. 198, 3; (H. 402)."

"huc accedebant xviii onerariae naves, quae ex eo loco a milibus passuum viii vento TENEBANTUR QUO minus in eundem portum venire possent: has equitibus tribuit."|"tenebantur quo minus possent: were prevented from being able."

"huius est civitatis longe amplissima auctoritas omnis orae maritimae regionum earum, quod et naves habent veneti plurimas, quibus in britanniam navigare consuerunt, et scientia atque usu rerum nauticarum ceteros antecedunt et IN MAGNO impetu maris atque aperto paucis portibus interiectis, quos tenent ipsi, omnes fere qui eo mari uti consuerunt habent vectigales."|"in magno impetu . *** . interiectis: as only a few harbors are interspersed in the vast and open sea, subject to violent storms, lit. in the great violence of the vast and open sea."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . existimarent: explain the subjunctive; see note on the same, p. 72>**S-aut occultari aut omnino ignari posse: could either be concealed (i.e. for a time) or be entirely unobserved."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ariovistum: subject of vicisse."

"NOT FOUND"|"According to Caesar, what was the number of persons, men, women, and children, engaged in the Helvetian migration? How many of these survived the battle?CAESAR***S GALLIC WARWar with Ariovistus, 30-54Chapter ^p. *** Bello Helvetiorum confecto: at the close of the Helvetian War. Notice the force of con, denoting completeness, thoroughness."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 124, line 2, Chapter 35. *** ad barbaros perlata est: spread everywhere among the barbarians, lit. was borne through to the barbarians."

"tum demum liscus oratione caesaris adductus quod antea tacuerat proponit: ESSE NON nullos, quorum auctoritas apud plebem plurimum valeat, qui privatim plus possint quam ipsi magistratus."|"Esse non nullos, etc.: observe that the speech of Liscus, occupying the rest of the chapter, is in the indirect discourse. Note carefully the use of moods."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromVERSITY OF 10NOTES ***BOOK I, 49-52minus . *** . valebat: he was not (less) strong."

"neque multum frumento, sed MAXIMAM PARTEM lacte atque pecore vivunt multum sunt in venationibus;  quae res et cibi genere et cotidiana exercitatione et libertate vitae, quod a pueris nullo officio aut disciplina adsuefacti nihil omnino contra voluntatem faciunt, et vires alit et immani corporum magnitudine homines efficit."|"maximam partem : for the most part. H. 416,2; LM. 508; A. 240, b; G. 338, 2; B. 185; (H. 378, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"By what means did the Helvetii attempt to cross the Arar? How did Caesar cross it? What did Divico propose in his interview with Caesar?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Gaius Valerus Procillus: see p. 92,1. 19."

"petierunt uti sibi concilium totius galliae in diem certam indicere idque caesaris facere voluntate liceret: sese habere quasdam res quas EX COMMUNI consensu ab eo petere vellent."|"ex communi consensu: with the common consent, i.e. with the consent of their people, lit. out of, implying that the action starts from (or grows out of) this consent."

"NOT FOUND"|"ita .. .^moleste ferebant: so they were annoyed, etc., lit. bore it ill."

"petierunt uti sibi CONCILIUM TOTIUS galliae in diem certam indicere idque caesaris facere voluntate liceret: sese habere quasdam res quas ex communi consensu ab eo petere vellent."|"concilium totius Galliae: Caesar's right to be consulted in this matter rests on the theory that might makes right."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 46. *** geruntur, nuntiatum est: note the historical present after Dum with the historical perfect in the principal clause; see dum ea conquiruntur, p. 75,1. 23."

"ID FIERI posse, si suas copias haedui in fines bellovacorum introduxerint et eorum agros populari coeperint."|"Id fieri posse: i.e. manus distineri posse."

"NOT FOUND"|"se: that he, Caesar, referring to the principal subject, as usual in the indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Diviciaco, Lisco: in apposition with principibus."

"NOT FOUND"|"conloquid : dative of purpose. H. 425, 3; LM. 548; A. 233, b;356; B. 191; (H. 384, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . interpellaremus: who assigns this reason? What mood and tense would be used in the direct discourse?"

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam tanto suo populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus esset, hanc sibi populoque romano gratiam referret ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, HAEC ESSE quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret ut quos illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"haec esse quae . . . postularet: the following were the demands which he (Caesar) made of him (Ariovistus), lit. the things which he demanded. This is the principal clause of the sentence, and esse is the leading verb, depending on a verb of saying implied in mandatis."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. sese . . . venire: that they committed themselves to (were coming into) his protection and power; sese, as usual, refers to the principal subject, maiores, while eius refers to Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"25. Cum: although."

"NOT FOUND"|"domo: from home.	H. 462,4; LM. 608; A. 258, a; G. 390, 2; B. 229,b; (H. 412, 1)."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ANTE DICTUM est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"ante dictum est: see p. 56,1. 2."

"et x. milites, ut in sinistra parte aciei constiterant, pilis emissis cursu ac lassitudine exanimatos vulneribusque confectos atrebates (nam his ea pars obvenerat) celeriter EX LOCO superiore in flumen compulerunt et transire conantes insecuti gladiis magnam partem eorum impeditam interfecerunt."|"ex loco superiore: the Atrebates had crossed the river and rushed up the hill occupied by Labienus, but they were quickly driven back."

"NOT FOUND"|"centurionibus: give the number of centurions in a legion, and the present number with Galba; see p. 126,1. 11; also 81."

"persuadent rauracis et tulingis et latobrigis finitimis, uti eodem usi consilio oppidis suis vicisque exustis una CUM IIS proficiscantur, boiosque, qui trans rhenum incoluerant et in agrum noricum transierant noreiamque oppugnabant, receptos ad se socios sibi adsciscunt."|"cum iis: secum would have been the regular construction, but suis has just been used to refer to the Rauraci, etc. Below, however, se and sibi are used regularly to refer to the Helvetii, the subject of persuadent."

"id si fieret, intellegebat magno cum periculo provinciae FUTURUM UT homines bellicosos, populi romani inimicos, locis patentibus maximeque frumentariis finitimos haberet."|"17. futurum ut. .. non auderent: that the other legions would not dare to make a stand against them; periphrastic form of the future infinitive**GoogleCAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages hi, 112ut.. . auderent is a substantive clause of result, and the subject of the infinitive futurum; cf. fieri tit. .. sumerent, p. 101,1. 24. H. 619, 2; LM. 984;288, f; G. 248; B. 270, 3** (H. 537** 3)*Adiuvabat: the subject is quod Nenrii... effecerant, etc. Note the emphatic position of Adiuvabat, as introducing a fact which adds weight to the advice already given."

"NOT FOUND"|"546; LM. 805; A. 287, e\ G. 509, 2; B. 268, 3; (H. 495, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"IS- Sequanis: dative of apparent agent with essent perferendi; render actively, the Sequani must endure all tortures."

"NOT FOUND"|"What have you learned from the last two chapters in regard to indirect discourse ? What in regard to the Belgian confederacy ?"

"hunc illi e navi egressum, cum ad eos oratoris modo caesaris mandata deferret, comprehenderant atque in vincula coniecerant;  tum proelio facto remiserunt et in petenda pace eius rei culpam in multitudinem contulerunt et propter imprudentiam UT IGNOSCERETUR petiverunt."|"ut ignosceretur petiverunt: asked pardon, lit. that pardon might be granted them."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 67, line 1. *** sub septentrionibus: toward the north."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. brevi *** . . flectere: quickly to control and turn them."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones certissimae res accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo INIUSSU SUO et civitatis sed etiam inscientibus ipsis fecisset, quod a magistratu haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare in eum aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"iniussu suo et civitatis: without his (Caesar***s) orders and without those of the state (i.e. Haedui). Observe that the possessive suo and the possessive genitive civitatis are entirely coordinate."

"NOT FOUND"|"fore: that it would be; impersonal; the subject is implied in si modo ... cognovisset."

"legionis confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit, quartae cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, signo amisso, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis aut occisis, in his primipilo p. sextio baculo, fortissimo viro, multis gravibusque vulneribus confecto, ut iam se sustinere non posset, reliquos esse tardiores et non nullos ab novissimis deserto loco proelio excedere ac tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes intermittere et ab utroque latere instare et rem esse in angusto vidit, neque ullum esse subsidium quod submitti posset,  scuto ab novissimis [uni] militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus milites SIGNA INFERRE et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis uti possent."|"signa inferre . . . iussit: he gave the order to advance the standards and open the ranks,24. quo *** *** . possent: see quo , , . impedirent, p. Ill, 1. 22.Pages i i 7, 118] NOTES *** BOOK II, 25-27Cuius : i.e. Caesaris."

"caesar postero die t. labienum legatum cum iis legionibus quas ex britannia reDUXERAT IN morinos qui rebellionem fecerant misit."|"duxerat = in matrimonium duxerat: had married\ but in the line above duxerat means simply had brought,filiae: like uxores, the subject of fuerunt."

"itaque se quod in longiorem diem conlaturus fuisset repraesentaturum et proxima nocte de quarta vigilia castra moturum, ut QUAM PRIMUM intellegere posset utrum apud eos pudor atque officium an timor plus valeret."|"quam primum: as soon as possible."

"germani post tergum clamore audito, cum suos interfici viderent, armis abiectis SIGNIS MILITARIBUS relictis se ex castris eiecerunt,  et cum ad confluentem mosae et rheni pervenissent, reliqua fuga desperata, magno numero interfecto, reliqui se in flumen praecipitaverunt atque ibi timore, lassitudine, vi fluminis oppressi perierunt."|"signis militaribus: the standards of the Gauls and Germans were usually figures of animals; see signifer, plate I, figure 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cum... saepius quaereret: when he had repeatedly inquired; imperfect best rendered by the pluperfect; see note on cum ... contenderentt p. 78,1. n."

"NOT FOUND"|"poenas: satisfaction."

"accedebat quod suos ab se liberos abstractos OBSIDUM NOMINE dolebant, et romanos non solum itinerum causa sed etiam perpetuae possessionis culmina alpium occupare conari et ea loca finitimae provinciae adiungere sibi persuasum habebant."|"obsidum nomine: as hostages, lit. by or under the name of hostages."

"NOT FOUND"|"Crassus adulescens : Crassus, the Younger, in distinction from his father, the Triumvir."

"his rebus adducti et auctoritate orgetorigis permoti constituerunt ea quae AD PROFICISCENDUM pertinerent comparare, iumentorum et carrorum quam maximum numerum coemere, sementes quam maximas facere, ut in itinere copia frumenti suppeteret, cum proximis civitatibus pacem et amicitiam confirmare."|"ad proficiscendum: H. 628; LM. 995; A. 300; G. 432, r.; B. 338, 3; (H. 542, III)."

"NOT FOUND"|"In which direction are the Helvetii supposed to be moving? What river have they recently crossed? What is Caesar doing?"

"NOT FOUND"|"602; LM. 881; A. 324; G. 561; B. 287; (H. 518, N. 1)."

"complures annos portoria reliquaque omnia haeduorum vectigalia parvo pretio redempta habere, propterea quod ILLO LICENTE contra liceri audeat nemo."|"illo licente: when he bid,nemo: observe the emphatic position."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. fortunae: this depends on eventus, the subject of sequebantur.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARChapter 23. *** in sinistra parte acie \ on the left of the line, where Labienus was in command; acie, genitive. H. 134, 2; LM. 236; A. 74; G. 63, N. 1; B. 52, 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"aries : the battering ram was used to batter down the walls and towers of besieged cities. It consisted of a heavy beam with a massive iron head. It was suspended from a framework by means of ropes or chains, and, in the hands of a hundred men, could be driven against the walls with almost irresistible force; see 115."

"PAULATIM AUTEM germanos consuescere rhenum transire et in galliam magnam eorum multitudinem venire populo romano periculosum videbat, neque sibi homines feros ac barbaros temperaturos existimabat quin, cum omnem galliam occupavissent, ut ante cimbri teutonique fecissent, in provinciam exirent atque inde in italiam contenderent [, praesertim cum sequanos a provincia nostra rhodanus divideret]; quibus rebus quam maturrime occurrendum putabat."|"3. Paulatim autem .. . consuescere . . . venire: that the Germans should become accustomed to cross, etc. This clause is the subject of esse to be supplied with periculosum, would be a menace (lit. dangerous)."

"NOT FOUND"|"oppugnarant: shortened from oppugnaverant."

"NOT FOUND"|"suos: this seems to refer to their families, their wives and children, who were so ruthlessly slaughtered."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. trans Mosam: across the Meuse, i.e. to the western side of the river. Caesar was at this time between the Rhine and the Meuse."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. suos finitimos: their neighbors, i.e. neighbors of the Remi."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. ita ... anguste, etc.: i.e. the cliffs were so precipitous and so near the sea that, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 13. *** Namque: for, explaining the fact implied in chapter 12, that the Venetian vessels could be used on that coast, while those of Caesar would be in constant danger."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate ID SIBI facere liceat."|"id Sibi contendendum: that he must attempt it. He accordingly proceeded to bridge the Rhine, probably near Bonn, possibly higher up the river, near Neuwied."

"NOT FOUND"|"pervenerant: this they had accomplished during Caesar***s absence of several weeks in Italy. The entire train of the Helvetii, men, women, children, and baggage, forming a line forty or fifty miles in length, must have moved very slowly through this narrow defile."

"NOT FOUND"|"Capto monte: when they (the enemy) had gained the mountain."

"ubi nostros non esse inferiores intellexit, loco pro castris ad aciem instruendam natura oportuno atque idoneo, quod is collis ubi castra posita erant paululum ex planitie editus tantum adversus in latitudinem patebat quantum loci acies instructa occupare poterat, atque ex utraque parte lateris deiectus habebat et in fronte leniter fastigatus paulatim ad planitiem redibat, ab utroque latere eius collis TRANSVERSAM FOSSAM obduxit circiter passuum cccc  et ad extremas fossas castella constituit ibique tormenta conlocavit, ne, cum aciem instruxisset, hostes, quod tantum multitudine poterant, ab lateribus pugnantes suos circumvenire possent."|"27. transversam fossam: a transverse or cross trench, i.e. a trench at right angles to the general direction of the hill. These trenches were designed to protect the flanks of the Roman army; see plan of battle in text."

"NOT FOUND"|"se: them, referring to quae, the subject of implorabant, i.e. the women."

"haedui, cum SE SUAQUE ab iis defendere non possent, legatos ad caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium:  ita se omni tempore de populo romano meritos esse ut paene in conspectu exercitus nostri agri vastari, liberi [eorum] in servitutem abduci, oppida expugnari non debuerint."|"Se suaque omnia ... consentirent: Direct discourse:Nos nostraque omnia in fidem atque in potestatem populi Romani permittimus, neque cum reliquis Belgis consensimus neque contra populum Romanum coniuravimus paratique sumus et obsides dare et imperata facere et oppidis recipere et frumento ceterisque rebus iuvare; reliqui omnes Belgae in armis sunt, Germanique, qui cis Rhenum incolunt, sese cum his coniunxerunt, tantusque est eorum omnium furor ut ne Suessiones quidem, fratres consanguineosque nostros, qui eodem iure et isdem legibus utuntur (utantur), unum imperium unumque magistratum nobiscum habent (habeant) deterrere potuerimus quin cum his consentirent (consentiant)."

"erat ob has causas summa difficultas, quod naves propter magnitudinem nisi in alto constitui non poterant, militibus autem, ignotis locis, impeditis manibus, magno et gravi onere armorum oppressis simul et de navibus desiliendum et in fluctibus consistendum et cum hostibus erat pugnandum,  CUM ILLI aut ex arido aut paulum in aquam progressi omnibus membris expeditis, notissimis locis, audacter tela coicerent et equos insuefactos incitarent."|"cum illi: while or though they (the enemy)."

"his facile pulsis ac proturbatis, incredibili celeritate ad flumen decucurrerunt, ut paene uno tempore et ad silvas et in flumine [et iam IN MANIBUS nostris] hostes viderentur."|"in Andibus: modern authorities place the Andes north of the Loire in modern Anjou, somewhat remote from the sea."

"hi novissimos adorti et MULTA MILIA passuum prosecuti magnam multitudinem eorum fugientium conciderunt, cum ab extremo agmine, ad quos ventum erat, consisterent fortiterque impetum nostrorum militum sustinerent,  priores, quod abesse a periculo viderentur neque ulla necessitate neque imperio continerentur, exaudito clamore perturbatis ordinibus omnes in fuga sibi praesidium ponerent."|"multa milia : cf. milia passuum octo, p. 103,1. 18."

"genus hoc erat pugnae, quo se germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, totidem numero pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, QUOS EX omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas ut iubis sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"quos ex Tencteris: this refers to the cavalry which had taken refuge among the Sugambri; see p. 154, 11. 12-16."

"NOT FOUND"|"si . . . introduxerint: the future perfect would be used in the direct discourse. H. 644, 2; A. 337, 3; G. 514, (a); B. 319, a\ (H. 525, 2). suas copias: note the emphatic position."

"NOT FOUND"|"litterisque . . . fiebat: and he was likewise repeatedly informed by the letters of Labienus. It will be remembered that Labienus had been left in charge of the winter quarters; see p. 98,1. 5."

"horum omnium fortissimi sunt belgae, PROPTEREA QUOD a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important,  proximique sunt germanis, qui trans rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt."|"propterea quod . . . crevisset: causal clause; the subject is a pronoun referring to Dumnorix. How does cresco differ in meaning from augeo ? see auxisse, p. 68,1. 17."

"legati haec se ad suos relaturos dixerunt et re deliberata post diem tertium ad caesarem reversuros: interea ne PROPIUS SE castra moveret petierunt."|"propius se : nearer them ; see proprius tutgulum, p. 91,1. 23."

"NOT FOUND"|"popularentur, prohiberent: purpose like expugnarent."

"hi propter propinquitatem et celeritatem hostium NIHIL IAM caesaris imperium expectabant, sed per se quae videbantur administrabant."|"24. nihil iam: not at all longer\ H. 416, 2; LM. 507; A. 240, a; G. 338. 2; B. 176, 3, a; (H. 378, 2)."

"hi cum tantopere de potentatu inter se multos annos contenderent, FACTUM ESSE uti ab arvernis sequanisque germani mercede arcesserentur."|"factum esse: it came to pass; the subject is the substantive clause of result, uti... arcesserentur."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 123, line 2, Chapter 33.***quod ... crediderant: observe the force of the indicative. H. 588, I; LM. 851; A. 321; G. 540; B. 286; (H. 516)."

"SUAM INNOCENTIAM perpetua vita, felicitatem helvetiorum bello esse perspectam."|"27. suam innocentiam: his integrity, blamelessness, freedom from avarice, as opposed to avaritiam. Note the emphatic position of suam, contrasting his integrity with their avarice. Observe carefully Caesar***s argument: mutinies occur only when the commander has been unsuccessful or guilty of avarice; his freedom from avarice was known to all, and they themselves had seen his wonderful success in the Helvetian war. What, then, was the conclusion?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Sequani and Helvetii: in partitive apposition with the subject of dent."

"NOT FOUND"|"terrae Galliae: herg Galliae is in apposition with terrae."

"NOT FOUND"|"27- flagitare: this verb means to demand with earnestness and importunity, and is especially appropriate here; it is in the historical infinitive with Caesar as its subject. H. 610; LM. 708; A. 275; G. 647; B. 335; (H. 536,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"sic: explained by the rest of the chapter, which is in the indirect discourse, and is the object of reperiebat. Direct:Nullus aditus est ad eos mercatoribus; nihil patiuntur vini reliquarumque rerum ad luxuriam pertinentium inferri, quod his rebus relanguescere animos et remitti virtutem existimant; sunt homines feri magnaeque virtutis; increpitant atque incusant reliquos Belgas, qui se populo Romano dediderint patriamque virtutem proiecerint; confirmant sese neque legatos missuros neque ullam condicionem pacis accepturos."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod: this, referring in part to the preceding sentence, but more fully explained by suas copias ... diduci."

"ariovistum autem, ut semel gallorum copias proelio vicerit, quod proelium factum sit ad magetobrigam, superbe et crudeliter imperare, obsides nobilissimi cuiusque liberos poscere et in eos omnia EXEMPLA CRUCIATUSQUE edere, si qua res non ad nutum aut ad voluntatem eius facta sit."|"exempla cruciatusque: an instance of hendiadys, lit. examples and tortures."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . traheretur: explain mood."

"ita mobilitatem equitum, stabilitatem peditum in proeliis praestant, ac tantum usu cotidiano et exercitatione efficiunt uti in declivi ac praecipiti loco incitatos equos sustinere et brevi moderari ac flectere et PER TEMONEM percurrere et in iugo insistere et se inde in currus citissime recipere consuerint."|"per temonem .. . insistere: to run along the pole and stand on the yoke, Le. on the yoke that connected the horses and held up the pole of the chariot."

"NOT FOUND"|"gratulatum: supine denoting purpose; see rogatum, p. 63,1. 12."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti ... liceret: object clause of purpose, depending on Petierunt, sibi: construe with lipei;et."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 156, line 1. *** opinionem eius exercitus: the reputation of his (Caesar***s) army."

"NOT FOUND"|"navigio... praerumpebantur: our vessel was driven forcibly forward, and the ropes were torn asunder."

"NOT FOUND"|"locis: locative ablative; see non nullis locis, p. 59,1. 22."

"NOT FOUND"|"conferendum, comparandam: give the literal meaning of each. Do you regard them as synonyms here? If so, what is the idea which they have in common, and what is the distinction between them?"

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat QUOD ITER ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"quod ... iter per vim temptassent: in that they had tried to force a passage, etc.; temptassent represents the indicative of the direct discourse, but it is in the subjunctive because it is in a subordinate clause of the indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"eo: upon themy i.e. on the horses. Thus the horses of the Gallic cavalry, four thousand in number (p. 66,1. 10), were assigned to the soldiers of the famous tenth legion."

"NOT FOUND"|"29. et plerique . . . respondeant: and since most persons give answers adapted to their wishes ; eorum refers to the implied subject of serviant."

"castris munitis VINEAS AGERE quaeque ad oppugnandum usui erant comparare coepit."|"vineas agere : to move forward the vineae ; see 112."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 90, line 2. *** omnes Galliae civitates: here Ariovistus indulges in a little exaggeration. Only the Haedui and their allies had fought against him."

"eo circiter hominum xvi milia expedita cum omni equitatu ariovistus misit, QUAE COPIAE nostros terrerent et munitione prohiberent."|"3. quae copiae ... terrerent: relative clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter ii. *** per angustias: through the narrow pass, i.e. the pass between the Jura and the Rhone, now called the Pas de l***.Ecluse; see p. 59, L 16, and note on a lacu ... ad Iuram, p. 60, 1. 28."

"at germani celeriter ex CONSUETUDINE SUA phalange facta impetus gladiorum exceperunt."|"14. consuetudine sua: H. 475, 3; LM. 612; A. 245; G. 408; B. 219; (H. 416)."

"NOT FOUND"|"**23. milites: object of cohortatus."

"NOT FOUND"|"What have you learned from this chapter about the climate of Gaul? Why was Caesar in trouble about supplies ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"aut . . . data: or when a favorable opportunity offered itselflegato : apparent agent; with the periphrastic infinitive, dimicandum."

"caesari CUM ID nuntiatum esset, eos per provinciam nostram iter facere conari, maturat ab urbe proficisci et quam maximis potest itineribus in galliam ulteriorem contendit et ad genavam pervenit."|"cum id nuntiatum esset: when it had been announced; temporal clause, ^ involving the idea of cause, which is the real explanation of the mood. These tidings cause the action described in maturat . .. proficisci; see also cumNOTES ***BOOK I, 6, 7.. . conaretur, p. 58, 1. 27; id represents the clause, eos . . . conari, which is grammatically in apposition with it."

"his difficultatibus duae res erant subsidio, scientia atque usus militum, quod superioribus proeliis exercitati QUID FIERI oporteret non minus commode ipsi sibi praescribere quam ab aliis doceri poterant, et quod ab opere singulisque legionibus singulos legatos caesar discedere nisi munitis castris vetuerat."|"quid fieri oporteret: what ought to be done; indirect question, depending upon praescribere."

"hac oratione habita mirum in modum conversae sunt omnium mentes summaque alacritas et cupiditas belli gerendi innata est,  princepsque x. legio per tribunos militum EI GRATIAS egit quod de se optimum iudicium fecisset, seque esse ad bellum gerendum paratissimam confirmavit."|"ei gratias egit: returned thanks to him ; see note on gratiam referret, p. 82,1. 3**quod . . . fecisset: who assigns this reason?"

"NOT FOUND"|"591, 1; LM. 836; A. 320; G. 631, 2; B. 283; (H. 503)."

"NOT FOUND"|"spectant: probably used in the same sense as vergit, as interpreted above."

"quare ne committeret ut is locus ubi constitissent ex calamitate populi romani et internecione exercitus nomen caperet aut MEMORIAM PRODERET."|"memoriam proderet: to transmit the remembrance ; i.e. of the disaster."

"NOT FOUND"|"What pretext has Caesar for interfering with the movements of the Helvetii ? Why does he return to Italy ? Where is he at the close of this chapter, and how many legions has he under his command ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod traducat: as to his leading over; traducat represents the indicative of the direct discourse. Explain subjunctive."

"pugnatum est diu atque acriter, cum sotiates superioribus victoriis freti in sua virtute totius aquitaniae salutem positam putarent, nostri autem quid SINE IMPERATORE et sine reliquis legionibus adulescentulo duce efficere possent perspici cuperent; tandem confecti vulneribus hostes terga verterunt."|"sine imperatore: i.e. without Caesar. Imperator is the commander in chief of an army; dux is the general term for commander."

"NOT FOUND"|"statuat, iubeat: in an object clause of purpose."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani AB HIS poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"ab his: i.e. from the envoys of the Remi."

"NOT FOUND"|"igitized by GoogleNOTES ***BOOK I, 18-20eius: referring to Dumnorix."

"NOT FOUND"|"utebantur: in this entire chapter note the free use of the descriptive imperfect, picturing the scene, in the subjunctive after cum, otherwise in the indicative."

"namque omnium rerum quae AD BELLUM usui erant summa erat in eo oppido facultas,   idque natura loci sic muniebatur ut magnam ad ducendum bellum daret facultatem, propterea quod flumen [alduas] dubis ut circino circumductum paene totum oppidum cingit,  reliquum spatium, quod est non amplius pedum mdc, qua flumen intermittit, mons continet magna altitudine, ita ut radices eius montis ex utraque parte ripae fluminis contingant,  hunc murus circumdatus arcem efficit et cum oppido coniungit."|"ad bellum usui: of (for) use in (to) war. What kind of a dative is usui?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 159, 160ibi: there, i.e. among the Atrebates."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 136, line 2. *** res gerebatur: the action took place."

"quod multitudinem germanorum in galliam traducat, id se SUI MUNIENDI, non galliae oppugnandae causa facere; eius rei testimonium esse quod nisi rogatus non venerit et quod bellum non intulerit sed defenderit."|"sui muniendi: gerundive construction depending on causa."

"NOT FOUND"|"superaverint: perfect subjunctive representing the future perfect of the direct discourse; see constituisset, p. 65, 1. 3."

"compluribus his proeliis pulsis ab ocelo, quod est oppidum citerioris provinciae extremum, IN FINES vocontiorum ulterioris provinciae die septimo pervenit; inde in allobrogum fines, ab allobrogibus in segusiavos exercitum ducit."|"in fines . . . pervenit: he arrived in the territory, etc."

"itaque vocatis ad se undique mercatoribus, neque quanta esset insulae magnitudo neque quae aut quantae nationes incolerent, neque quem USUM BELLI haberent aut quibus institutis uterentur, neque qui essent ad maiorem navium multitudinem idonei portus reperire poterat."|"USUm belli: skill in war, lit. experience of war."

"NOT FOUND"|"proelio: ablative of time, like patrum memoria, line 14."

"id hoc facilius iis persuasit, quod undique loci natura helvetii continentur: una ex parte flumine rheno latissimo atque altissimo, qui agrum helvetium a germanis dividit; altera ex parte monte iura altissimo, qui est inter sequanos et helvetios; tertia lacu lemanno et flumine rhodano, qui PROVINCIAM NOSTRAM ab helvetiis dividit."|"12. provinciam nostram: our province, i.e. the Roman province."

"munitis castris duas ibi legiones reliquit et partem auxiliorum, quattuor reliquas legiones in CASTRA MAIORA reduxit."|"castra maiora: thus Caesar had two camps, castra maiora with four legions and castra minora with two."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut tempus defuerit: that the time was insufficient."

"NOT FOUND"|"consuerunt: why perfect? H. 299, 2; A. 279, e; G. 175, 5; B. 262; (H. 297, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"2.. frumenta: standing grain, the usual meaning of the plural."

"eo cum de improviso celeriusque omnium opinione venisset, remi, qui proximi galliae ex belgis sunt, ad eum legatos iccium et andebrogium, primos civitatis, miserunt,  qui dicerent se suaque omnia in fidem atque potestatem populi romani permittere, neque se cum reliquis belgis consensisse neque contra populum romanum coniurasse,   paratosque esse et obsides dare et imperata facere et OPPIDIS RECIPERE et frumento ceterisque rebus iuvare;  reliquos omnes belgas in armis esse, germanosque qui cis rhenum incolant sese cum his coniunxisse,  tantumque esse eorum omnium furorem ut ne suessiones quidem, fratres consanguineosque suos, qui eodem iure et isdem legibus utantur, unum imperium unumque magistratum cum ipsis habeant, deterrere potuerint quin cum iis consentirent."|"Oppidis recipere: to receive him into their towns, lit. in (or by means of) their towns. H. 476, 3; LM. 628; A. 258,/; G. 389; B. 218, 7; (H. 425,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"perturbantur: they are in doubtcopiasne ... an ... an: a triple disjunctive question, depending on perturbantur. H. 380, 6; LM. 705; A. 21 ij G. 458; B. 162, 4; (H. 353, 2,Quo loco: in thisplacet i.e. in the camp. Note the prominent position of these words, required by their close connection with the preceding sentence, like quorum timor cum above."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ariovistum se . . . desperarent: Direct discourse:Ariovistus me consule cupidissime populi Romani amicitiam appetiit; cur hunc tam temere quisquam ab officio discessurum iudicet? Mihi quidem persuadetur cognitis meis postulatis atque aequitate condicionum perspecta eum neque meam neque populi Romani gratiam repudiaturum. Quod si furore atque amentia impulsus bellum intulerit, quid tandem vereamini? aut cur de vestra virtute aut de mea diligentia desperetis?"

"NOT FOUND"|"maiori parti placuit: the majority decided."

"gallorum eadem atque belgarum oppugnatio est haec: ubi circumiecta multitudine hominum totis moenibus undique in murum lapides iaci coepti sunt murusque defensoribus nudatus est, TESTUDINE FACTA portas succedunt murumque subruunt."|"testudine facta: forming the testudo ; see 117. Phalange facta has nearly the same meaning; see note on it, p. 72,1. 26."

"NOT FOUND"|"quid . . . posset periclitabatur: he tried to ascertain what the enemy -could effect by his valor ; quid, cognate accusative."

"NOT FOUND"|"multitudine : ablative of specification; see nomine Bibrax, p. 103,17. H. 480; LM. 650; A. 253; G. 397; B. 226; (H. 424)."

"ubi vineis actis aggere extructo turrim procul constitui viderunt, primum inridere ex muro atque increpitare vocibus, quod TANTA MACHINATIO a tanto spatio institueretur:  quibusnam manibus aut quibus viribus praesertim homines tantulae staturae (nam plerumque omnibus gallis prae magnitudine corporum quorum brevitas nostra contemptui est) tanti oneris turrim in muro sese posse conlocare confiderent?"|"tanta machinatio: these towers were sometimes of great height; see no."

"NOT FOUND"|"his, eos, hi: these pronouns refer to pedites."

"ad quos cum caesar nuntios misisset, QUI POSTULARENT eos qui sibi galliaeque bellum intulissent sibi dederent, responderunt:  populi romani imperium rhenum finire; si se invito germanos in galliam transire non aequum existimaret, cur sui quicquam esse imperii aut potestatis trans rhenum postularet?"|"qui postularent: to demand; relative clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"dum . . . convenirent: temporal clause involving purpose; until the soldiers, etc., should assemble, and in order that they might assemble. H. 603,	^ II, 2 ; LM. 921; A. 328; G. 572; B. 293, III, 2; (H. 519, II, 2)."

"ita dies circiter xv iter FECERUNT UTi inter novissimum hostium agmen et nostrum primum non amplius quinis aut senis milibus passuum interesset."|"fecerunt ut . . . videretur, etc.: caused their departure to seem, etc.; ut. . . videretur: substantive clause of result, object of fecerunt; see ut.. . possent efficiebat, p. 103,1. 11."

"NOT FOUND"|"- 18. quod . . . cognoverant: a reason on Caesar***s<own authority, hence the indicative."

"adiuvabat etiam eorum consilium qui rem deferebant quod nervii antiquitus, cum equitatu nihil possent (neque enim ad hoc tempus ei rei student, sed QUICQUID POSSUNT, pedestribus valent copiis), quo facilius finitimorum equitatum, si praedandi causa ad eos venissent, impedirent, teneris arboribus incisis atque inflexis crebrisque in latitudinem ramis enatis [et] rubis sentibusque interiectis effecerant ut instar muri hae saepes munimentum praeberent, quo non modo non intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset."|"quicquid possunt. . . copiis: whatever power they have is in their infantry."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 65, line 1. *** Si pacem . .. Helvetiorum: conditional sentence of the first form; direct discourse thus: si pacem . . . faEiet. . . ibunt. . . erunt Helvetii . . . constitueris ... volueris; sin .. .perseverabis... reminiscere, etc."

"cum finem oppugnandi nox fecisset, iccius remus, summa nobilitate et gratia inter suos, qui tum oppido praeerat, unus ex iis qui legati de pace ad caesarem venerant, nuntium ad eum mittit, NISI SUBSIDIUM sibi submittatur, sese diutius sustinere non posse."|"2. nisi subsidium ... non posse: indirect discourse, depending on nun* tium mittit, involving the idea of saying. H. 642, 1; LM. 1021; A. 336, 2, N. 2; G. 649, N. 2; B. 314, 2; (H. 523, I, N.)."

"NOT FOUND"|"digitized by (jOO^lCCAESAR***S GALLIC WAR9. frumento reliquoque commeatu: grain and the other supplies, both for man and beast."

"cum tridui viam processisset, nuntiatum est ei ariovistum cum suis omnibus copiis AD OCCUPANDUM vesontionem, quod est oppidum maximum sequanorum, contendere [triduique viam a suis finibus processisse]."|"ad occupandum Vesontionem : gerundive, expressing purpose, a common idiom."

"NOT FOUND"|"praestitero: note the force of the future perfect. H. 540,1; LM. 748; A. 281, R.; G. 244, n. 15 B. 264, a; (H. 473, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"adfinitatem: adfinitas is alliance by marriage, while propinquitas is relationship by blood."

"ibi orgetorigis filia atque unus e filiis CAPTUS EST."|"captus est: agreeing with unus, the nearer subject."

"eadem secreto AB ALIIS quaerit; reperit esse vera:  ipsum esse dumnorigem, summa audacia, magna apud plebem propter liberalitatem gratia, cupidum rerum novarum."|"ab aliis quaerit: compare quaerit ex solo. How are verbs of asking and demanding, as quaero, peto> and flagito, generally used? H. 411, 4; A. 239, <r, N. 1; G. 339, R. I; (H. 374, N. 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. incolerent: attracted into the subjunctive by mitterentur."

"erant hae difficultates belli gerendi quas supra ostendimus, sed tamen multa caesarem ad id bellum incitabant:  INIURIA RETENTORUM equitum romanorum, rebellio facta post deditionem, defectio datis obsidibus, tot civitatum coniuratio, in primis ne hac parte neglecta reliquae nationes sibi idem licere arbitrarentur."|"27. injuria retentorum, etc.: the crime of retaining Roman knights, lit the wrongs of the Roman knights retained, referring to Silius and Velanius, mentioned in chapters 7 and 8; see note on legatos . . . retentos, p. 131, 1. 2: iniuria, rebellio, defectio, coniuratio, and the clause ne... arbitrarentur are all in apposition with multa, and present the considerations which led Caesar to enter upon this war."

"hunc ad egrediendum nequaquam idoneum locum arbitratus, dum reliQUAE NAVES eo convenirent ad horam nonam in ancoris expectavit."|"quae naves, earum = earum navium quae: H. 399, 3; A. 200, b; G. 616; B. 231, 4; (H, 445, 9)**quae: construe the implied antecedent of quae with comportari iubebat."

"EIUS BELLI haec fuit causa."|"Eius belli ... causa : why does Eius belli stand at the beginning of this sentence, and causa at the end ? H. 669, 1 and 2; LM. 1151; A. 344; G. 672, 2; B. 350, 9; (H. 561)."

"interim milites legionum duarum quae in novissimo agmine praesidio impedimentis fuerant, proelio nuntiato, cursu incitato in summo colle ab hostibus conspiciebantur,  et t. labienus castris hostium potitus et ex loco superiore quae res in nostris castris gererentur conspicatus x. LEGIONEM SUBSIDIO nostris misit."|"legionem subsidio nostris: see subsidio oppidanis, p. 104,1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"queratur: why subjunctive?"

"ita uno tempore et longas naves, [quibus caesar exercitum transportandum curaverat,] quas caesar in aridum subduxerat, aestus complebat, et onerarias, quae ad ancoras erant deligatae, tempestas adflictabat, neque ulla nostris facultas AUT ADMINISTRANDI aut auxiliandi dabatur."|"aut administrandi aut auxiliandi: either of managing them or of rendering any assistance."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduis: depends upon satisfaciant, supplied from si . . . satisfaciant below."

"NOT FOUND"|"evellere: the object is a pronoun, to be supplied, referring to pilorum."

"quibus fortiter resistentibus VINEAS TURRESQUE egit."|"7. vineas turresque egit: see in, 112."

"HAEC UTRAQUE insuper bipedalibus trabibus immissis, quantum eorum tignorum iunctura distabat, binis utrimque fibulis ab extrema parte distinebantur;  quibus disclusis atque in contrariam partem revinctis, tanta erat operis firmitudo atque ea rerum natura ut, quo maior vis aquae se incitavisset, hoc artius inligata tenerentur."|"Haec utraque: these tivo pairs."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 13. *** reliquas... Helvetiorum: emphasis places these words before ut."

"HAEC CUM pluribus verbis flens a caesare peteret, caesar eius dextram prendit; consolatus rogat finem orandi faciat; tanti eius apud se gratiam esse ostendit uti et rei publicae iniuriam et suum dolorem eius voluntati ac precibus condonet."|"17. Haec cum ... adegerat: when, by means of machines, he had let these down into the water, had secured them there, and had driven them down with rammers."

"una cum his legatis commius atrebas venit, quem SUPRA DEMONSTRAVERAM a caesare in britanniam praemissum."|"supra demonstraveram: see p. 159,1. 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"supportaretur: see ut ante ... fecissent, p. 81,1. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"locis: locative ablative. H. 48$, 2; LM. 626; A. 258,/; 0.385,N. 1; B. 281, I, b; (H. 425, 2)."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  EO AUTEM frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"eo autem ... poterat: moreover he was not able (was less able) to use the grain which he had brought up the river Arar in vessels."

"cum iam amplius horis sex continenter pugnaretur, ac non solum vires sed etiam tela nostros deficerent, atque hostes acrius instarent languidioribusque nostris vallum scindere et fossas complere coepissent, resque esset iam ad extremum perducta casum,  p. sextius baculus, primi pili centurio, quem nervico proelio compluribus confectum vulneribus diximus, et item c. volusenus, TRIBUNUS MILITUM, vir et consilii magni et virtutis, ad galbam accurrunt atque unam esse spem salutis docent, si eruptione facta extremum auxilium experirentur."|"tribunus militum: see 80."

"NOT FOUND"|"si. . . esset ... fuisse: condition contrary to fact; conclusion belonging to past time; hence venturum fuisse; cf. si .. . fuisset, non fuisse, etc., p. 65,18. H. 647; LM. 1039; A. 337, b; G. 597, 4; B. 321; (H. 527). *quid: give construction; what does opus usually take? H. 477, III, with note; LM. 646, 649; A. 243, e; G. 406; B. 218, 2; (H. 414, IV, with note 4)."

"si quid accidat romanis, summam in spem per helvetios regni obtinendi venire; imperio populi romani non modo DE REgno, sed etiam de ea quam habeat gratia desperare."|"de re publica: in regard to the common weal, i.e. in regard to subjects of common interest."

"NOT FOUND"|"Horum: of these, i.e. of the Germans; partitive genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"confecto: construe with itinere."

"hac re statim caesar PER SPECULATORES cognita insidias veritus, quod qua de causa discederent nondum perspexerat, exercitum equitatumque castris continuit."|"per speculatores: distinguish per with the accusative, from the ablative, and from the ablative with ab j H. 468, 3, N.; A. 246, b\ G. 401; (H. 415, I, N. 1)."

"horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus confecti procubuissent, scutis innixi proelium redintegrarent, calones perterritos hostes conspicati etiam inermes armatis occurrerent,  equites vero, ut turpitudinem fugae virtute delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae SE LEGIONARIIS militibus praeferrent."|"se legionariis . . . praeferrent: sought to outdo the legionary soldiers."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this direct discourse with Caesar***s indirect form. Note and explain the changes.	'"

"NOT FOUND"|"neque . . . negotii: and that it would not be at all difficulty lit. nor was there anything of difficulty. H. 441; LM. 564; A. 216, a; G. 369; B. 201, 2; (H. 397)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cimbris . . . pulsis: these victories of Marius, so important for the safety of Rome, were gained in the years 102 and 101 B.c."

"NOT FOUND"|"hominibus compleri: H. 477, II; 1M. 651; A. 248, c, 2; G. 405; B. 218, 8; (H. 421, II)."

"helvetii, seu quod timore perterritos romanos discedere a se existimarent, EO MAGIS quod pridie superioribus locis occupatis proelium non commisissent, sive eo quod re frumentaria intercludi posse confiderent, commutato consilio atque itinere converso nostros a novissimo agmine insequi ac lacessere coeperunt."|"eo magis, quod: the more because, lit. the more on this account because; eo is explained by quod . . . non commississent, which gives a special reason for the opinion of the Helvetii."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 3. *** Galba: subject of coepjt."

"labienus, ut erat ei praeceptum a caesare ne proelium committeret, nisi ipsius copiae prope hostium castra VISAE ESSENT, ut undique uno tempore in hostes impetus fieret, monte occupato nostros expectabat proelioque abstinebat."|"visae essent: indirect discourse; represents the future perfect, etc., of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"convenirent: this probably represents the present subjunctive, let... assemble."

"his rebus et suam rem familiarem auxisse et facultates ad largiendum magnas comparasse;  magnum numerum equitatus suo sumptu semper alere et circum se habere,  neque solum domi, sed etiam apud finitimas civitates LARGITER POSSE, atque huius potentiae causa matrem in biturigibus homini illic nobilissimo ac potentissimo conlocasse;  ipsum ex helvetiis uxorem habere, sororum ex matre et propinquas suas nuptum in alias civitates conlocasse."|"largiter posse: that he had great influence."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduis: H. 429, 2; LM. 534; A. 229; G. 347, r. 5; **. 188, 2, d; (H. 386, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ex Voluseno cognovisset: see p. 159,11. 15-18."

"NOT FOUND"|"testimonium: predicate accusative with esse. The subject of esse is quod . . . defenderit. H. 588, 3; LM. 848; A. 333; G. 525; B. 299;nisi rogatus: without being asked\quod . . . non intulerit, sed defenderit: that he had not waged an offensive but a defensive war."

"ariovistum autem, ut semel gallorum copias proelio vicerit, quod proelium factum sit ad magetobrigam, superbe et crudeliter imperare, obsides nobilissimi cuiusque liberos poscere et in eos omnia exempla cruciatusque edere, si qua res non AD NUTUM aut ad voluntatem eius facta sit."|"ad nutum . . .voluntatem: according to his bidding or desire; nutum, nod, beck, is the expression of the desire, while voluntatem is the desire itself."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. fecissent: this represents the future perfect of the direct discourse. Explain mood and tense."

"NOT FOUND"|"ii. Eo: thither, i.e. to his winter quarters."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipsos . . . restituere iussit: observe that iussit takes the accusative and the infinitive, while imperavit above takes the dative and an ut clause, ipsos, themy emphatic, in distinction from Allobrogibus above."

"cum iam amplius horis sex continenter pugnaretur, ac non solum vires sed etiam tela nostros deficerent, atque hostes acrius instarent languidioribusque nostris vallum scindere et fossas complere coepissent, resque esset iam ad extremum perducta casum,  p. sextius baculus, primi pili centurio, quem nervico proelio compluribus confectum vulneribus diximus, et item c. volusenus, tribunus militum, vir et consilii magni et virtutis, ad galbam accurrunt atque UNAM ESSE spem salutis docent, si eruptione facta extremum auxilium experirentur."|"unam esse . . . experirentur: that the only hope of safety was to make a sally and try the last resource."

"NOT FOUND"|"prohibiturum: infinitive = se prohibiturum. The object is readily supplied.'"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 24. *** id animadvertit: he notices this, lit. turns his attention to it."

"helvetii, SEU QUOD timore perterritos romanos discedere a se existimarent, eo magis quod pridie superioribus locis occupatis proelium non commisissent, sive eo quod re frumentaria intercludi posse confiderent, commutato consilio atque itinere converso nostros a novissimo agmine insequi ac lacessere coeperunt."|"seu quod existimarent, sive eo quod confiderent: either because they thought, or because (lit.Tor this reason because) they were confident. Why is the subjunctive used? H. 588, II; LM. 851; A. 321; G. 541; B. 286, I; (H. 516, II)."

"et secundum ea multae res eum hortabantur quare sibi eam rem cogitandam et suscipiendam putaret, in primis quod haeduos, fratres consanguineosque saepe numero a senatu appellatos, in servitute atque [in] dicione videbat germanorum teneri eorumque obsides esse apud ariovistum ac sequanos intellegebat; quod IN TANTO imperio populi romani turpissimum sibi et rei publicae esse arbitrabatur."|"in tanto . . . Romani: when the power of the Roman people was so great, lit. in the so great, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 21. *** Ad ... cognoscenda: construe with praemittit."

"haec SI ENUNTIATA ariovisto sint, non dubitare quin de omnibus obsidibus qui apud eum sint gravissimum supplicium sumat."|"si enuntiata . . . sint: unchanged from the direct discourse, a condition of the second form."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui SUMMO MAGISTRATUI praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"summo magistratui praeerat: was invested with the highest authority; explain the dative."

"NOT FOUND"|"sortibus: the Germans made frequent use of lots in divining the future."

"celeriter, ut ante caesar imperaverat, ignibus significatione facta, ex proximis castellis eo concursum est,  pugnatumque ab hostibus ita acriter est ut a viris fortibus in extrema spe salutis iniquo loco CONTRA EOS qui ex vallo turribusque tela iacerent pugnari debuit, cum in una virtute omnis spes consisteret."|"contra eos qui iacerent: against those who (i.e. any who) were hurling. The subjunctive makes the remark a general one; the indicative would have limited it to Caesar***s men. H. 591, 1; LM. 836; A. 320; G. 631, 2; B. 283; (H. 503, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Illi: subject of mittuntcuniculis actis, having extended mines. These were subterranean passages which the Gauls opened under the Roman works, for the purpose of undermining them."

"NOT FOUND"|"interfecerit: represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"prima luce, cum summus mons a [lucio] labieno teneretur, ipse ab hostium castris non longius mille et quingentis passibus abesset neque, ut postea ex captivis comperit, aut ipsius adventus aut labieni cognitus esset,   considius EQUO ADMISSO ad eum accurrit, dicit montem, quem a labieno occupari voluerit, ab hostibus teneri: id se a gallicis armis atque insignibus cognovisse."|"equo admisso: at full speed. Admittere in such expressions means to give loose reins."

"NOT FOUND"|"hunc locum: i.e. the territory which they then occupied between the Meuse and the Scheldt."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 70, line 2, Chapter 20. *** ne quid gravius ... statueret: not topass too severe a%sentence against his brother. Note that after ne, num, si, nisi, the indefinite quis, not aliquis, is generally used."

"NOT FOUND"|"Multo die: late in the day ; though probably ""only relatively so, implying that much time had been lost since daybreak (prima luce) when they might have surprised the enemy."

"itaque SE QUOD in longiorem diem conlaturus fuisset repraesentaturum et proxima nocte de quarta vigilia castra moturum, ut quam primum intellegere posset utrum apud eos pudor atque officium an timor plus valeret."|"se quod .. . repraesentaturum: he would do at once what he had intendedto defer, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the situation of the country of the Allobroges in its relation to . 1 that of the Helvetii? Where was Caesar when he heard of the movements of the Helvetii? What request did they make of him? What historical I p, fact did he mention in reply ?  Pages 6i, 62]	NOTES	***BOOK I, 7-9	N	15Page 61, line 2. *** milia passuum decem novem: extent of space; see milia, p. 57, 1. 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"4** qui *** . . pollicerentur: relative clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae totius factiones esse duas: the long speech of Diviciacus, occupying the rest of the chapter, is in the indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"persuasuros, coacturos: future infinitives without esse as usualbono animo: kindly disposed; ablative of characteristic. H. 473, 2;LM. 643; A. 251; G. 400; B. 224; (H. 419, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Id acciderat ut: it had happened that,nt . *** *** caperent: substantive clause of result, in apposition with Id. H. 571, 4; LM. 904; A. 332,/; G. 557; B. 297, 3; (H. 501)."

"NOT FOUND"|"How many legions had Caesar in this battle ? Who commanded the separate legions? Describe the Roman mode of attack."

"interim cotidie caesar haeduos frumentum, QUOD ESSENT publice polliciti, flagitare."|"quod essent, etc.: which they had promised, an indirect clause. Caesar***s thought at the time of making the demand; hence, the subjunctive. H. 649, I; LM. 1029; A. 341; G. 568, 3; B. 323; (H. 528, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 78, line 2. *** Caesari ad pedes: at the feet of Caesar. Caesari is a dative of relation; see sibi in si sibi .. . vellent, p. 76, 1. 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ob earn rem: on that account; res in some of its varied applications is best omitted in translation; see note on qua in re, p. 64,1. 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"civitati: the citizens, lit. the state. H. 426, 2; LM. 531; A. 227; G. 346;187, II, a\ (H. 385)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Dumnorigi: construe with persuadet, below."

"hi novissimos adorti et multa milia passuum prosecuti magnam multitudinem eorum fugientium conciderunt, cum ab extremo agmine, AD QUOS ventum erat, consisterent fortiterque impetum nostrorum militum sustinerent,  priores, quod abesse a periculo viderentur neque ulla necessitate neque imperio continerentur, exaudito clamore perturbatis ordinibus omnes in fuga sibi praesidium ponerent."|"ad quos consectandos: Caesar***s treachery and cruelty in the treatment of these Germans was severely censured at Rome. Plutarch tells us that Cato declared in the Roman senate that Caesar ought to be delivered up to the barbarians as an expiation for his inhuman conduct."

"NOT FOUND"|"equites Treveri: the cavalry of the Treveri; equites, subject of contenderunt. Treveri used as an adjective."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduis ... non . . . neque his neque, etc.: that he would not restore the hostages . . . but he would not wrongfully (iniuria) make war either upon them or their allies."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 74, line 1, Chapter^25. *** SUO: equo remoto is to be supplied from remotis equis in the next line."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut vellet: a substantive clause of result."

"ipsi erant ex cimbris teutonisque prognati, qui, cum iter in provinciam nostram atque italiam facerent, iis impedimentis quae secum AGERE AC portare non poterant citra flumen rhenum depositis custodiam [ex suis] ac praesidium vi milia hominum una reliquerant."|"agere ac portare: to drive or (and) carry; agere is used of cattle to be driven; portare, of articles to be carried."

"QUID SIBI vellet?"|"Quid sibi vellet: what did he wish ? sibi refers to Caesar, but in the next question suas refers to Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"frumentum, frumenta: note the well-known distinction between frumentum, the general word for corn, grain, and the plural, frumenta, grain standing in the field; see frumenta, frumento, p. 67,11. 2-4."

"NOT FOUND"|"How many indirect questions are there in this chapter? What mood is used in them? What mood is used in such questions in English?"

"quae quidem res caesari non minorem quam ipsa victoria voluptatem attulit, quod hominem honestissimum provinciae galliae, suum familiarem et hospitem, ereptum ex manibus hostium sibi restitutum videbat NEQUE EIUS calamitate de tanta voluptate et gratulatione quicquam fortuna deminuerat."|"neque eius calamitate . . . fortuna deminuerat: and because fortune had not by his death taken aught from, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Can you give the main points in Caesar***s argument?"

"hi post eorum obitum multos annos a finitimis exagitati, CUM ALIAS bellum inferrent, alias inlatum defenderent, consensu eorum omnium pace facta hunc sibi domicilio locum delegerant."|"cum alias . . *** defenderent: since they waged at one time offensive war, at another defensive, lit. warded it off when waged against them."

"NOT FOUND"|"funibus ... amissis: as they had lost, or having lost, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"praetio, ablative of price. H. 478; LM. 652; A. 252; G. 404; B. 225; (H. 422)."

"NOT FOUND"|"generatimque . . . Harudes, etc.: and stationed by tribes and at equal intervals the Harudes, etc.; paribus intervallis: ablative of attendant circumstance. H. 473, 3; LM. 635; A. 248; G. 399; B. 220, 1; (H. 419, ill)."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo SINE ULLO maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"sine ullo eius labore: without any effort on his (Caesar***s) part."

"NOT FOUND"|"continetur: it is bounded,\ lit. is held together."

"die constituta causae dictionis orgetorix ad iudicium omnem suam familiam, ad hominum milia decem, undique coegit, et omnes clientes obaeratosque suos, quorum MAGNUM NUMERUM habebat, eodem conduxit; per eos ne causam diceret se eripuit."|"magnum numerum: a large amount\ lit. a large number, used, perhaps, with reference to the number of wagons and beasts of burden."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hi ... lingua . .. differunt: the language of the Celtae was Celtic, that of the Belgae a Celtic dialect with some German elements, that of the Aquitani an Iberian dialect, of which the Basque, still spoken in a small district in the Pyrenees, is the modern representative."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 14.***Pro his: i.e.pro Bellovacis,post discessum Belgarum: see p. 107, L 22."

"NOT FOUND"|"flumen, exercitum: H. 413; LM. 501; A. 239, 2, b; G. 331, r. i;179; (H. 376)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Did the Nervii act on the suggestion of the deserters? If so, what was the effect, and why?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 32. *** respondit: the object is the indirect discourse, Se . . . inferrent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boios: construe with adsciscunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"mari, aestibus, portibus: ablatives absolute, but render by in and with."

"NOT FOUND"|"Remus summa nobilitate: one of the Remi, a man of the highest rank ; nobilitate, ablative of characteristic. H. 473, 2; LM. 643; A. 251; G. 400; B. 224; (H. 419, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"memoria: in the time. H. 486; LM. 630; A. 256; G. 393; B. 230; (H. 429)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 2. *** hibernorum: of their wintering or of the winter. Hiberna, which properly designates the winter quarters, is here used of the time spent in them."

"FACTUM EIUS hostis periculum patrum nostrorum memoria cimbris et teutonis a c. mario pulsis [cum non minorem laudem exercitus quam ipse imperator meritus videbatur]; factum etiam nuper in italia servili tumultu, quos tamen aliquid usus ac disciplina, quam a nobis accepissent, sublevarint."|"Factum eius hostis ... sublevarent: observe that the changes which have occurred in this sentence in passing from the direct to the indirect form have been very slight. Factum probably represents factum est; accepissent represents acceperant, sublevarent, sublevabant."

"NOT FOUND"|"extremum: the lasl (i.e. the most westerly) town."

"NOT FOUND"|"vexillum: this was the large vexillum displayed from the general***s tent, as the signal to prepare for action; see 101."

"hoc unum AD PRISTINAM fortunam caesari defuit."|"ad pristinam fortunam: Caesar was a firm believer in the power of fortune in war, and especially in his own good fortune. He distinctly claimsed by GooglePages 162-164] NOTES *** BOOK IV, 25-30	N	12Jfor himself felicitas (i, 40), which Cicero calls an indispensable requisite of a great commander."

"sabinus idoneo omnibus rebus loco castris sese tenebat, cum viridovix contra eum duorum milium spatio consedisset cotidieque productis copiis pugnandi potestatem faceret, ut iam non solum hostibus in contemptionem sabinus veniret, sed etiam nostrorum militum vocibus non nihil carperetur;  tantamque OPINIONEM TIMORIS praebuit ut iam ad vallum castrorum hostes accedere auderent."|"opinionem timoris : impression of cowardice,Id faciebat: i.e. kept himself in camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"accepisse: the subject is a pronoun implied in pulsos."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. ex sescentis : from six hundred senators ; construe with redactos esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"passibus ducentis: like aequo spatio, above."

"NOT FOUND"|"parte ... recepta: this refers to the left branch of the Rhine, called the Waal (Vacalus), which forms a junction with the Meuse."

"illi, ut erat imperatum, eductis iis cohortibus quae praesidio castris relictae intritae ab labore erant, et longiore itinere circumductis, ne ex hostium castris conspici possent, omnium oculis mentibusque ad pugnam intentis celeriter ad eas quas diximus munitiones pervenerunt  atque his prorutis prius in hostium castris constiterunt quam plane ab his videri aut QUID REI gereretur cognosci posset."|"quid rei gereretur: indirect question; subject of posset."

"quibus omnibus rebus permoti equites treveri, quorum inter gallos virtutis opinio est singularis, qui AUXILII CAUSA a civitate missi ad caesarem venerant, cum multitudine hostium castra [nostra] compleri, legiones premi et paene circumventas teneri, calones, equites, funditores, numidas diversos dissipatosque in omnes partes fugere vidissent, desperatis nostris rebus domum contenderunt:  romanos pulsos superatosque, castris impedimentisque eorum hostes potitos civitati renuntiaverunt."|"auxilii causa: as auxiliaries, lit. for the purpose of help or helping."

"ubi eo ventum est, caesar initio orationis sua senatusque in eum beneficia commemoravit, quod rex appellatus esset a senatu, quod amicus, quod munera amplissime missa; quam rem et paucis contigisse et pro magnis hominum officiis consuesse tribui docebat;  illum, cum neque aditum neque causam postulandi iustam haberet, beneficio ac liberalitate sua ac senatus EA PRAEMIA consecutum."|"ea praemia consecutum: that he had attained these distinctions, implying that he had sought them."

"huius est civitatis longe amplissima auctoritas omnis orae maritimae regionum earum, quod et naves habent veneti plurimas, quibus in britanniam navigare consuerunt, et scientia atque usu rerum nauticarum ceteros antecedunt et in magno impetu maris atque aperto paucis portibus interiectis, quos tenent ipsi, omnes fere qui eo mari uti consuerunt HABENT VECTIGALES."|"habent vectigales : they hold as tributaries ; vectigales, predicate accusative. H. 410, 2; LM. 521; A. 239, 1; G. 340; B. 178; (H. 373, 1, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by GOOglCCAESAR***S GALLIC WARPage 122, line 1. *** Non se *** . . permittere : indirect discourse. Direct as follows:Non existimamus Romanos sine ope divina bellum gerere, qui tantae altitudinis machinationes tanta celeritate promovere possint; nos nostraque omni? eorum potestati permittimus."

"NOT FOUND"|"nequa: note form. H. 186; LM. 287; A. 105, d; G. 107, n. 2; B. 91, 2; (H. 190,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"concurrebant: ran to their support."

"NOT FOUND"|"quoniam ... temptassent: see quoniam ... referret, p. 82,1. 1."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by GOOglCCAESAR***S GALLIC WARadferebantur: force of the imperfect? H. 534, 3; LM. 737; A. 115, 2, b; G. 231; B. 260, 2; (H. 469, II)."

"his rebus fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte homines bellandi cupidi MAGNO DOLORE adficiebantur."|"magno dolore adficiebantur: were greatly pained. H. 476, 2; G. 401, R. 3; (H. 420, 2).	'"

"NOT FOUND"|"extremis, pertinent, spectant: these words are ter be interpreted from the Roman point of view, i.e. in their relation to the Roman province. Thus, extremis finibus, the farthest confines, means the northern boundary, the one most remote from the province."

"NOT FOUND"|"***ado transitur: is fordable, lit. is crossed by means of a ford."

"ubi vineis actis aggere extructo turrim procul constitui viderunt, primum inridere ex muro atque increpitare vocibus, quod tanta machinatio a tanto spatio institueretur:  quibusnam manibus aut quibus viribus praesertim homines tantulae staturae (nam plerumque omnibus gallis PRAE MAGNITUDINE corporum quorum brevitas nostra contemptui est) tanti oneris turrim in muro sese posse conlocare confiderent?"|"prae magnitudine corporum: ancient writers abound in allusions to the size of the Gauls and the Germans."

"se ita a patribus maioribusque suis didicisse, ut magis virtute contenderent QUAM DOLO aut insidiis niterentur."|"quam dolo . .. niterentur: than to rely on stratagem or ambuscades ; dolo, ablative of means. H.476, 3; LM. 629; A. 254, b; G. 401, N. 6; B. 218, 3; (H. 425, 1, N.)."

"NOT FOUND"|"4. partes... traduxisse: this infinitive clause depends upon certior factus est; see note on Caesarem certiorem faciunt sese . . . prohibere, p. 63, 1. 17."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. Chapter 16. *** cum . . . turn: not only . . . but also."

"quod ubi caesar animadvertit, NAVES LONGAS, quarum et species erat barbaris inusitatior et motus ad usum expeditior, paulum removeri ab onerariis navibus et remis incitari et ad latus apertum hostium constitui atque inde fundis, sagittis, tormentis hostes propelli ac submoveri iussit; quae res magno usui nostris fuit."|"naves longas: see 126, 127."

"ac si quando magnitudine operis forte superati, extruso mari aggere ac molibus atque his oppidi moenibus adaequatis, suis fortunis desperare coeperant, magno NUMERO NAVIUM adpulso, cuius rei summam facultatem habebant, omnia sua deportabant seque in proxima oppida recipiebant:  ibi se rursus isdem oportunitatibus loci defendebant."|"numero navium appulso: observe that the Venetian vessels were especially adapted to those waters, while those of the Romans could not be safely used on that coast; see next chapter."

"NOT FOUND"|"21. Chapter 31. *** ex eventu ... ex eo, quod: from the fate of his ships and from the fact that."

"NOT FOUND"|"Diem: accusative of time."

"QUA IN re caesar non solum publicas, sed etiam privatas iniurias ultus est, quod eius soceri l. pisonis avum, l. pisonem legatum, tigurini eodem proelio quo cassium interfecerant."|"*9* Qua in re: in this. The Latin often uses a relative or demonstrative with res, where the English uses simply a demonstrative or a determinative pronoun."

"NOT FOUND"|"19- Populi Romani... postularet: write this in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"nolebant: why plural?"

"qui cupidius novissimum agmen insecuti alieno loco cum equitatu helvetiorum PROELIUM COMMITTUNT; et pauci de nostris cadunt."|"proelium committunt: they join battle, begin an engagement. Note the difference between prqelium committere, to begin battle, and proelium facere, to fight a battle; proelio commisso, after the battle was begun, proelio facto, after the battle was finished, or after the battle; see p. 64,1. 23."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesar ... ubi... vidit... processit ... iussit ... possent: this is a remarkable instance of a Latin period, but it gives a graphic picture of the crowded and confused battle scene which it is intended to portray. The independent clause of the sentence is as follows: Caesar . .. profectus, scuto .. *** detracto ... processit centurionibusque ... iussit. .. possent; while the dependent or subordinate clause is ubi . . . vidit ... in angusto vidit ... posset, which is expanded to a remarkable length by the insertion of several instances of the accusative and the infinitive, and of the ablative absolute. In translating such a sentence the student should not attempt, to render itCAESAR***S GALLIC WARliterally, and yet he should follow the Latin construction as closely as the English idiom will permit. Considerable liberty may be taken with the long subordinate clause, ubi . . . posset. This may be broken up into three or four similar clauses by repeating the words where he saw, or simply he saw, and some of the ablatives absolute may be rendered by clauses with that. For a poetical translation of a part of this sentence, see Longfellow***s ***Courtship of Miles Standish,*** II."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAnegotio desistere: see rapinis ... prohibere, p. 66,1. 21."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 129, 130War with the Veneti, 7-1616. Chapter 7.***superatis Belgis . . . Sedunis: for the conquest of the Belgae, see ii, 1-33; for the expulsion of Ariovistus from Gaul, see {, 30- 54. The defeat of the Alpine tribes by Galba has just been described in the last three chapters. Of these, only the Seduni, the most important, are here mentioned."

"cum ea ita sint, tamen, si obsides ab iis sibi dentur, uti ea quae polliceantur facturos intellegat, ET SI haeduis de iniuriis quas ipsis sociisque eorum intulerint, item si allobrogibus satisfaciant, sese cum iis pacem esse facturum."|"et si .. . deficeret: and even if the season should be insufficient, etc., i.e. too short."

"NOT FOUND"|"What did Caesar ask of Diviciacus? Where did Caesar place his camp, and what were the advantages of that position?Pages 103, 104]	NOTES	***	BOOK	II,	5-7	N 77Chapter 6. *** nomine: ablative of specification. H. 480; LM. 650; A. 253; G. 397; B. 226; (IJ.424)."

"persuadent rauracis et tulingis et latobrigis finitimis, uti EODEM USI consilio oppidis suis vicisque exustis una cum iis proficiscantur, boiosque, qui trans rhenum incoluerant et in agrum noricum transierant noreiamque oppugnabant, receptos ad se socios sibi adsciscunt."|"eodem usi consilio: adopting (having adopted) the same plan, i.e. the same as the Helvetii. H.477; LM. 646; A. 249; G.407; B. 218,1; (H. 421,1)."

"his difficultatibus duae res erant subsidio, scientia atque usus militum, quod superioribus proeliis exercitati quid fieri oporteret non MINUS COMMODE ipsi sibi praescribere quam ab aliis doceri poterant, et quod ab opere singulisque legionibus singulos legatos caesar discedere nisi munitis castris vetuerat."|"minus commode: less conveniently ox less easily, a euphemism meaning with the utmost difficulty."

"NOT FOUND"|"quanta ... magnitudo: indirect question, depending on reperire."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit UT NON mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"ut non . . . posset: negative result; how would negative purpose be expressed ?"

"ibi vadis repertis partem suarum copiarum traducere conati sunt eo consilio ut, SI POSSENT, castellum, cui praeerat q. titurius legatus, expugnarent pontemque interscinderent;  si minus potuissent, agros remorum popularentur, qui magno nobis usui ad bellum gerendum erant, commeatuque nostros prohiberent."|"si possent, si minus potuissent: notice the change of tense, if they should be able, if they should not have been able. The direct form would be, si pole- runt, si minus potuerint; potuissent, prior action relative to popularentur."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Chapter 12. *** hostes: subject of perturbaverunt."

"ariovistum autem, ut semel gallorum copias proelio vicerit, quod proelium factum sit ad magetobrigam, superbe et crudeliter imperare, obsides nobilissimi cuiusque liberos poscere et in eos omnia exempla cruciatusque edere, si qua res non AD NUTUM aut ad voluntatem eius facta sit."|"ad nutum et ad tempus: at the signal (i.e. instantaneously) and at the proper moment."

"NOT FOUND"|"Moribus: ablative of cause. What other ablatives of cause have we noticed ?"

"diviciacus multis cum lacrimis caesarem complexus obsecrare coepit ne quid gravius in fratrem statueret:  scire se illa esse vera, nec quemquam ex eo plus quam se doloris capere, propterea quod, cum ipse gratia plurimum domi atque in reliqua gallia, ille minimum propter adulescentiam posset, per se crevisset;  QUIBUS OPIBUS ac nervis non solum ad minuendam gratiam, sed paene ad perniciem suam uteretur."|"*** 7. quibus Opibus ac nervis uteretur: and this (lit. which) influence and power he (Dumnorix) was using, referring to the influence and power implied in per se crevisset; nervis, nerves, is used figuratively for strength and power. What case is used with utor and why? cf. usi consilio, p. 59,1. 11."

"NOT FOUND"|"recepturum: future infinitive without esse, as usual."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 27. *** etiam qui . . . procubuissent: even those who had fallen."

"NOT FOUND"|"consuetudine, merito: ablatives of cause; merito eorum represents merito vestro of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boii et Tulingi: see, plate X in the text."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWCAESAR***S GALLIC WARprincipatum: see note on this word, p. 58,1. 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF 10CAESAR***S GALLIC WARet quid: et connects quaerant to cogant."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod: why neuter? H. 396, 2; LM. 826; A. 195, d; G. 614, R. 3; B. 250, 3; (H. 445** 4)**a suis finibus, etc.: when these tidings ivere received, Caesar supposed Ariovistus to be quite as near Vesontio (Besan^on) as he was himself. Hence the great need of haste."

"caesari renuntiatur helvetiis esse in animo per agrum sequanorum et haeduorum iter in santonum fines facere, QUI NON longe a tolosatium finibus absunt, quae civitas est in provincia."|"qui non longe . . . absunt: an incorrect statement, intended doubtless to furnish a pretext for Caesar***s intended attack on the Helvetii. The Santones dwelt in the western part of Gaul, a long distance from the Roman province."

"itaque omni senatu necato reliquos SUB CORONA vendidit."|"sub corona: as slaves, lit. under the crown, referring to the chaplet placed on the head of the prisoner when offered for sale."

"NOT FOUND"|"Diviciacum: not to be confounded with Diviciacus, the Haeduan."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . .. annuus: who is elected for one year ; annuus agrees with qui."

"quod ubi crassus animadvertit, suas copias propter exiguitatem non facile diduci, hostem et vagari et vias obsidere et castris satis praesidii relinquere, ob eam causam minus commode frumentum commeatumque sibi supportari, in dies hostium numerum augeri, non cunctandum existimavit QUIN PUGNA decertaret."|"quin pugna decertaret: to fight a decisive battle ; see quin . . .proficisceretur, p. 100,1. 8."

"si [id] ita fecisset, sibi populoque romano perpetuam gratiam atque amicitiam cum eo futuram; si non impetraret, sese, quoniam m. messala, m. pisone consulibus senatus censuisset uti quicumque galliam provinciam obtineret, QUOD COMMODO rei publicae facere posset, haeduos ceterosque amicos populi romani defenderet, se haeduorum iniurias non neglecturum."|"quod commodo . . . posset: so far as he could do it consistently with the interests of the state; a restrictive clause. H. 591, 3; LM. 841; A. 320, d\ G. 627, R. i; B. 283, 5; (H. 503, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Eadem: the same questions."

"NOT FOUND"|"19. pila: object of coiciendi, which depends upon spatium, time, opportunity. For the pilum, see 86, 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"What have you learned about Dumnorix ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"praefectisque: and the prefects, who commanded the auxiliaries."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 14. *** His: to these, the Helvetii. Observe the position of this word and see note on id, p. 62, 1. 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"*What points of syntax noticed in this chapter may now be regarded as settled in your own minds?"

"NOT FOUND"|"rogare = se rogare : that they asked.N I4	CAESAR***S	GALLIC	WAR	[Page 60 ^eius voluntate: with his (Caesar***s) consent; ablative of cause.	Fige61liceat: id facere is its subject, and sibi its indirect object."

"NOT FOUND"|"reliquis . . . effecit: he made it possible to sail with the rest in comparative safety (satis commode)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . posset. H. 591, 1; LM. 836; A. 320; G. 631, 2; B. 283; (H. 503,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"naves: object of complebat."

"NOT FOUND"|"What facts of special interest have you noticed in the last two chapters?"

"quo in consilio, cum tantum repentini periculi praeter opinionem accidisset ac iam omnia fere superiora loca multitudine armatorum completa conspicerentur NEQUE SUBSIDIO veniri neque commeatus supportari interclusis itineribus possent,  prope iam desperata salute non nullae eius modi sententiae dicebantur, ut impedimentis relictis eruptione facta isdem itineribus quibus eo pervenissent ad salutem contenderent."|"15. neque subsidio veniri: and that no one could come to their relief. veniri, impersonal, is the subject of posset, implied in possent."

"NOT FOUND"|"adeat: imperative in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"milia: in what two ways is distance expressed in Latin? H. 417, 3; LM. 513, 655 ; A. 257, b; G. 335, R. 2; B. 181, 223; (H. 379, with 2)."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum QUOD VERERENTUR ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"quod vererentur: causal clause, indirect discourse. H. 643; LM. 1026; A. 336, 2; G. 650; B. 314, 1; (H. 524)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quoniam: construe with referret."

"NOT FOUND"|"14. quae oppugnaret: to attack ; cf. quae copiae . . . terrerent, above."

"NOT FOUND"|"magnopere . . . praecavendum: that he (sibi) ought to take every precaution."

"capto monte et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et NOVISSIMIS PRAESIDIO erant, ex itinere nostros ab latere aperto adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"novissimis praesidio erant: served as a guard for the rear."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 18. *** pluribus . . . iactari: that this subject (these matters) should be discussed in the presence of too many. Plures, and complures, which occurs below, both mean several, many, but plures often means too many, more than is proper, as in this case. To what does eas res refer?"

"is dies ERAT A. d. v. kal."|"erat a. d. . . . consulibus = erat ante diem quintum Kalendas Apriles,L. Pisone, A. Gabinio consulibus : L. Pisone . . . consulibus determines the year, 58 b.c.; Kalendas Apriles determines the month, March, as the accusative shows that the date was before the Calends (the 1st) of April; ante diem quintum determines the day, the 28th of March (the fifth day before the 1st of April, by the Roman method of counting both the 28th and the 1st)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAROptimum factu esse: see note on perfacile factu esse, p. 58, L 10."

"caesar honoris diviciaci atque haeduorum causa sese eos in fidem recepturum et conservaturum dixit, et quod ERAT CIVITAS magna inter belgas auctoritate atque hominum multitudine praestabat, dc obsides poposcit."|"erat civitas magna, etc., atque hominum multitudine praestabat:notice the chiasmus. H. 666, 2; LM. 1150; A. 344,/; G. 682; B. 350,11, c; (H. 562)."

"NOT FOUND"|"reliqui: partitive genitive in the predicate with esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne: construe with posset."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipse, se (line 7) : these pronouns refer to Diviciacus."

"NOT FOUND"|"equis . . . detractis: ablative absolute."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 79, line 1. *** Sed peius victoribus... pararentur: write this out in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"eorum: referring to the Sequani."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Chapter 35. *** idem quod: the same thing which, explained by the clause, ut... effugerent."

"QUI CUM eum in itinere convenissent seque ad pedes proiecissent suppliciterque locuti flentes pacem petissent, atque eos in eo loco quo tum essent suum adventum expectare iussisset, paruerunt."|"8. Qui cum contulissent: when they (the Bellovaci) had betaken. NoteOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAN83this not uncommon use of the relative. Explain mood in contulissent; see cum . . . quaereret\ p. IOI, 1. 17."

"NOT FOUND"|"peius accidisse: that a worse fate had befallen ; peius used substantively is the subject of accidisse.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARvictoribus: victorious; adjective."

"NOT FOUND"|"Transisse Rhenum . . . pependerint: Direct discourse:Transii Rhenum non mea sponte, sed rogatus et arcessitus a Gallis; non sine magna spe magnisque praemiis domum propinquosque reliqui: sedes habeo in Gallia ab ipsis concessas, obsides ipsorum voluntate datos; stipendium capio iure belli quod victores victis imponere consuerunt. Non ego Gallis, sed Galli mihi bellum intulerunt; omnes Galliae civitates ad me oppugnandum venerunt ac contra me castra habuerunt; eae omnes copiae a me uno proelio pulsae ac superatae sunt. Si iterum experiri volunt, ego iterum paratus sum decertare; si pace uti volunt, iniquum est de stipendio recusare quod sua voluntate ad hoc tempus pependerunt29. victores victis: see the fuller form, p. 82,1. 21. qui vicissent = victores; iis quos vicissent = victis."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. ut . .. tolleret: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"What have you learned from the speech of Diviciacus in regard to the migration of the Germans into Gaul? Who was Ariovistus? What do you think of his character?"

"NOT FOUND"|"By what moods do you render the several subjunctives in this chapter ?"

"his rebus fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et MINUS FACILE finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte homines bellandi cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"minus facile, etc.: resistance could not be easily (could be less easily) offered; resisti posset: impersonal."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 106, line 1. *** ad extremas fossas: at the end of the trenches; see collis adversusy above."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipsum ... uxorem habere: his wife was the daughter of Orgetorix;see p. 58,1. 10.	1sororem ex matre: his half-sister, sister by the same mother."

"NOT FOUND"|"censuisset: had decreed\	As this verb involves purpose, it takes a purpose clause as its object, uti... defenderet."

"NOT FOUND"|"Britanniae: H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187,111; (H. 386)."

"sese tamen et AMORE FRATERNO et existimatione vulgi commoveri."|"amore fraterno, etc.: by love for his brother and by the opinion of the multitude.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARQuod si: now if H. 510,9; A. 240, b\ G. 610, r. 2; B. 185, 2; (H. 453,6)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 62, line 1, Chapter 9. *** una via: only the way, i.e. the narrow pass r along the right bank of the Rhone, between the mountains and the river."

"QUAE QUIDEM res caesari non minorem quam ipsa victoria voluptatem attulit, quod hominem honestissimum provinciae galliae, suum familiarem et hospitem, ereptum ex manibus hostium sibi restitutum videbat neque eius calamitate de tanta voluptate et gratulatione quicquam fortuna deminuerat."|"Quae quidem res: this fortunate event, i.e. the rescue of his faithful friend Procillus; quidem adds emphasis to the expression."

"NOT FOUND"|"frumento: note the number in distinction from frumenta, grain standing in the field; it depends on uti; see usi consilio, p. 59,1. II."

"NOT FOUND"|"\Vhy did Caesar discontinue the pursuit of the Helvetii? What was the immediate result?"

"NOT FOUND"|"8. Chapter 14. *** Acie triplici instituta: i.e. Caesar marched with his army in line of battle, as he often did in the vicinity of an enemy; see 73."

"NOT FOUND"|"in Italiam: into Italy, i.e. into his province of Cisalpine Gaul, which was regarded as a part of Italy."

"interim saepe cum legati ultro citroque inter eos mitterentur, ariovistus postulavit ne quem peditem ad conloquium caesar adduceret: vereri se ne per insidias ab eo circumveniretur; uterque cum equitatu veniret: alia ratioNE SEse non esse venturum."|"ne se armis despoliaret: object clause of purpose, in apposition with Unum, the object of petere and deprecari."

"eo de media nocte caesar isdem ducibus usus qui nuntii ab iccio venerant, numidas et cretas sagittarios et funditores baleares subsidio oppidanis mittit;  quorum adventu et remis cum spe defensionis studium propugnandi accessit et hostibus eadem de causa spes POTIUNDI OPPIDI discessit."|"potiundi oppidi: gerundive construction; cf. the gerund propugnandi, above. H. 623, 1; LM. 998; A. 296, R.; G. 427, N. 5; B. 339; (H. 544, n. 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"inter ... septentriones: northwest, i.e. northwest of the province."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. venissent: see priusquam . *** vfieret, p. 148,1. 14."

"NOT FOUND"|"What plan did the Belgae adopt after the battle, and why?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 24. *** levis armaturae: see levis armaturae Numidas, p. 105,1. 27."

"qua de causa helvetii quoque reliquos gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aUT IPSI in eorum finibus bellum gerunt."|"Ut ipsi . .. oporteret: as it would not be proper to yield to him (Ariovistus); concedi, impersonal passive.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARsi . . . faceret: if he were makings condition contrary to fact, with imperfect subjunctive in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the result of the battle? What was the fate of Ariovistus and his family?Page 98, line 1, Chapter 54. *** Ubii: the deadly foes of the Suebi."

"NOT FOUND"|"quinis . .. milibus: the distributive implies that the statement is true for each of the fifteen days; milibus depends on the comparative amplius."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallis magno . . . impedimento: it was (for) a great hindrance to the Gauls in fighting (to the battle); the subject of erat is the clause, quod . . . neque .. . poterant: for the two datives, see H. 433; LM. 548; A. 233, a; G. 356; B. 191, 2; (H. 390); also auxilio Caesari, p. 69, 1. 6."

"caesarem vel auctoritate sua atque exercitus vel recenti victoria vel nomine populi romani DETERRERE POSSE ne maior multitudo germanorum rhenum traducatur, galliamque omnem ab ariovisti iniuria posse defendere."|"deterrere posse ne ... traducatur: could prevent a larger number of Germans from crossing the Rhine ; ne maior . . . traducatur, gives the purpose of deterrere; quo minus could have been used instead of ne. H. 596, 2; LM. 909; A. 331, e, 2; G. 549; B. 295, 3; (H. 505, II, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Accedebat: there was the additional fact, viz. ut . . . ferrent... consisterent . .. timerent; substantive clauses with the potential subjunctive; subject of Accedebat. H. 571, 1; LM. 902; A. 332, a, 2; G. 553, 4; B. 297, 2; (H. 501)."

"legionis confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit, quartae cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, signo amisso, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis aut occisis, in his primipilo p. sextio baculo, fortissimo viro, multis gravibusque vulneribus confecto, ut iam se sustinere non posset, RELIQUOS ESSE tardiores et non nullos ab novissimis deserto loco proelio excedere ac tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes intermittere et ab utroque latere instare et rem esse in angusto vidit, neque ullum esse subsidium quod submitti posset,  scuto ab novissimis [uni] militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus milites signa inferre et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis uti possent."|"reliquos esse: in translating, supply he saw,non nullos ... excedere: that some in the rear, abandoning their places, were withdrawing from the battle,hostes neque subeuntes intermittere: that the enemy did not stop advancing, neque : not, lit. both not, correlative of et in the next line."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter ii. *** ut... constitutum: see p. 150,1.11."

"NOT FOUND"|"conscripserat: give the literal meaning; also the proper rendering here."

"his constitutis rebus et consilio cum legatis et quaestore communicato, ne quem diem pugnae praetermitteret, OPORTUNISSIMA RES accidit, quod postridie eius diei mane eadem et perfidia et simulatione usi germani frequentes, omnibus principibus maioribusque natu adhibitis, ad eum in castra venerunt,  simul, ut dicebatur, sui purgandi causa, quod contra atque esset dictum et ipsi petissent, proelium pridie commisissent, simul ut, si quid possent, de indutiis fallendo impetrarent."|"27* opportunissima res: explained by quod . . *** venerunt, which is in apposition with it."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUID vellent, ad id."|"Si quid accidat Romanis: a euphemism, meaning if any great disaster should befall the Romans."

"NOT FOUND"|"Harudum . . . hominum XXIIII: twenty-four thousand of the Harudes. Harudum depends upon hominum."

"diu CUM ESSET pugnatum, impedimentis castrisque nostri potiti sunt."|"cum esset pugnatum: give the regular construction in temporal clauses with cum."

"NOT FOUND"|"impedimentorum: this included all the heavy baggage of the army which was carried in wagons or on beasts of burden; see 72. The soldiers carried their arms, rations, and some few necessary utensils, as axes, saws, spades, etc. Thus encumbered the soldiers were said to be sub sarcinis, under their packs; see 1. 16, below."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this passage with the corresponding passage in Caesar; note and explain all differences."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui *** *** . occupati erant: who were engaged in the work, i.e. in the work of fortifying the camp. Here occupati is an adjective. H. 640, 3; LM. 1012; A. 291, b; G. 250, 2; (H. 550, N. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Gallis contemptui: see nobis usui, p. 106, L 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"daret: imperative in direct discourse; it depends on petebant."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduos ... perferre: the reason given by the chiefs for making war upon the Romans."

"NOT FOUND"|"What, according to Caesar, was the effect of this battle upon the Nervii?"

"si quos adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis RATIONE ET consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"ratione et consilio: by stratagem and cunning."

"NOT FOUND"|"ita egit: the speech of Divico is reported in the indirect discourse, and occupies the rest of the chapter."

"NOT FOUND"|"475, 2; LM. 570; A. 245, c; G. 373; B. 198, 15 (H. 416)."

"ibi praesidium ponit et IN ALTERA parte fluminis q. titurium sabinum legatum cum sex cohortibus relinquit; castra in altitudinem pedum xii vallo fossaque duodeviginti pedum muniri iubet."|"in altera parte: on the other side, i.e. on the south or left bank of the river. Caesar had crossed the river, and was encamped on the right bank."

"illi omnia experti, cum neque VI CONTENDERE propter inopiam navium neque clam transire propter custodias menapiorum possent,    reverti se in suas sedes regionesque simulaverunt et tridui viam progressi rursus reverterunt atque omni hoc itinere una nocte equitatu confecto inscios inopinantes menapios oppresserunt,  qui de germanorum discessu per exploratores certiores facti sine metu trans rhenum in suos vicos remigraverant."|"vi contendere: to force a passage."

"NOT FOUND"|"Belgas quam . . . partem: the Belgae, whose country, etc. The name of a people, or a pronoun referring to a people, is sometimes thus used for the name of the country; quam is attracted from quos to agree with the predicate noun partem. H. 396, 2; LM. 826; A. 199; G. 614, R. 3; B. 250, 3; (H. 445** 4)-tertiam partem: one of the three parts, not strictly a third part."

"ubi PRIMA IMPEDIMENTA nostri exercitus ab iis qui in silvis abditi latebant visa sunt, quod tempus inter eos committendi proelii convenerat, ut intra silvas aciem ordinesque constituerant atque ipsi sese confirmaverant, subito omnibus copiis provolaverunt impetumque in nostros equites fecerunt."|"27. prima impedimenta: the first part of the baggage train."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. quod existimarent: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. qui . . . possent: causal relative clause."

"ibi cum alii fossas complerent, alii multis telis coniectis defensores vallo munitionibusque depellerent, auxiliaresque, quibus ad pugnam non multum crassus confidebat, lapidibus telisque subministrandis et ad aggerem caespitibus comportandis speciem atque OPINIONEM PUGNANTIUM praeberent, cum item ab hostibus constanter ac non timide pugnaretur telaque ex loco superiore missa non frustra acciderent,  equites circumitis hostium castris crasso renuntiaverunt non eadem esse diligentia ab decumana porta castra munita facilemque aditum habere."|"opinionem pugnantium: the impression that they were actually engaged in the battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 45.***in eam sententiam quare: to show why, lit. to this purport why."

"NOT FOUND"|"monuitque . . . administrarentur: and admonished them that everything should be done, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"transtra . . . trabibus: cross beams (not benches) of timbers a foot in thickness. The Venetian ships seem not to have been rowed at all."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 77, line 1.***ad: abou{; adverb."

"quod improviso unum pagum ADORTUS ESSET, cum ii qui flumen transissent suis auxilium ferre non possent, ne ob eam rem aut suae magnopere virtuti tribueret aut ipsos despiceret."|"6. adortus esset, transissent: verbs in the subordinate clauses of the indirect discourse."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii CERTIORES FACTI sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"12. certiores facti sunt: were informedlit. were made more certain. Observe that certiores is simply an adjective, agreeing with the subject Helvetiiqui dicerent: who were to say, or simply to say; volitive subjunctive in a relative clause of purpose; see qua . . . conveniant, p. 60, 1. 2; qui refers to nobilissimos."

"NOT FOUND"|"scutisque . . . detrahenda: and for removing the coverings from the shields. The shields, when not in use, were protected by leathern coverings, scutis, ablative pf separation."

"hos seditiosa atque improba oratione multitudinem deterrere, ne frumentum conferant quod debeant:  PRAESTARE, SI iam principatum galliae obtinere non possint, gallorum quam romanorum imperia perferre,  neque dubitare [debeant] quin, si helvetios superaverint romani, una cum reliqua gallia haeduis libertatem sint erepturi."|"praestare, si iam... neque dubitare... erepturi: these are the arguments which the men of whom Liscus speaks use with the multitude. The verb of saying on which this indirect discourse depends is implied in oratione,24. The subject of the infinitive praestare is Gallorum ... perferre, that it is better to endure, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"oppido: place and means."

"NOT FOUND"|"quem ... iudicassent: attracted into the subjunctive by deligerent; see commemorassent, p. 65,1. 16."

"his cum SUA SPONTE persuadere non possent, legatos ad dumnorigem haeduum mittunt, ut eo deprecatore a sequanis impetrarent."|"3. sua sponte = per se: of themselves, i.e. by their unaided efforts; sponte / is a defective noun in the ablative, and usually means by one's cnvnfrec 7vill. In classical prose it is always limited by a possessive, mea, tua, etc., or by aliena."

"qui EIUS CONSILII principes fuissent, quod intellegerent quantam calamitatem civitati intulissent, in britanniam profugisse."|"24. eius consilii principes: the authors of this measure."

"NOT FOUND"|"aquilam prodere: the loss of the eagle would be a great disgrace."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. vocibusque: and from the statements, or reports."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... suppeteret: subjunctive of purpose. H. 568; LM, 899; A. 317, 1; G. 545; B. 282; (H. 497, II)."

"quod si VETERIS CONTUMELIAE oblivisci vellet, num etiam recentium iniuriarum, quod eo invito iter per provinciam per vim temptassent, quod haeduos, quod ambarros, quod allobrogas vexassent, memoriam deponere posse?"|"veteris contumeliae: their former outrage, referring to the defeat of Cassius; see veteris incommodi, 1. 4."

"NOT FOUND"|"timendum: that they ought to fear ; impersonal infinitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Does Caesar admit the claims of Ariovistus?"

"primo per omnes partes perequitant et tela coiciunt atque IPSO TERRORE equorum et strepitu rotarum ordines plerumque perturbant, et cum se inter equitum turmas insinuaverunt, ex essedis desiliunt et pedibus proeliantur."|"ipso terrore equorum: by the very terror caused by their horses; what kind of a genitive?"

"NOT FOUND"|"frumento: ablative of separation."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare QUO DIE frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"quo die: on which ; note the repetition of the antecedentfrumentum, etc.: the clause frumentum ... metiri is the subject of oporteret, a potential subjunctive. The Roman soldiers received a stated allowance of grain, usually wheat or barley, from which they prepared their bread; see 89, footnotes."

"NOT FOUND"|"alarios: auxiliaries; called alarii, because originally they were stationed on the wings (alae) of the legion."

"NOT FOUND"|"illi: they, i.e. the essedarii,30* expeditum receptum: an easy retreat,Page 166, line 2. *** sustinere: to rein in; construe with consuerint."

"NOT FOUND"|"locuti: speaking. The object is Non *** *** *** possent; se suaque . *** .. permittere depends on dixerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. inermes, armatos ac victores: though (when) unarmed, etc. At first the insurgents were to a large extent without arms, but they subsequently obtained arms and gained many victories. They were finally defeated by Crassus, 71 B.c.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARhos: these, i.e. these with Ariovistus."

"aquitania a garumna flumine ad pyrenaeos montes et eam partem oceani QUAE EST ad hispaniam pertinet; spectat inter occasum solis et septentriones."|"quae est ad Hispaniam: which borders upon (is near) Spain."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. Chapter 10. *** renuntiatur: word is brought back, i.e. by the scouts sent out to watch the movements bf the Helvetii. The subject of this impersonal verb is the indirect discourse, Helvetiis esse . . . facere."

"NOT FOUND"|"Germanos transire prohibebant: the usual construction in Caesar with prohibeo, though the subjunctive with ut, ne, or quo minus is common in other writers."

"NOT FOUND"|"intermitteretur: was continually interrupted; note the force of the imperfect, action going on."

"NOT FOUND"|"neque recusare quin armis contendant: and that they do not decline to fight; recusare may be followed by ne, quin, or quo minus ; see recusaturos quo minus . . . essent, p. 78, 1. 27; also, H. 596, 2; LM. 913; A. 319, d; G. 554; B. 295, 3; (H. 505, II, 1)."

"interim saepe cum legati ultro citroque inter eos mitterentur, ariovistus postulavit ne quem peditem ad conloquium caesar adduceret: vereri se ne per insidias ab eo circumveniretur; uterque cum equitatu veniret: alia ratioNE SEse non esse venturum."|"ne se . . . traderent: compare this clause with ne qua spes . . . relinqueretur above; observe that they are alike in form. How are they distinguished in use? What is the proper designation of each?"

"NOT FOUND"|"27. Chapter 21. *** superioribus victoriis: probably those over Valerius and Manlius mentioned in the last chapter. H. 476,1; LM. 629; A. 254, b, 2; G. 401, N. 6; B. 218, 3; (H. 425, 1, N.)."

"DE NUMERO eorum omnia se habere explorata remi dicebant, propterea quod propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti quantam quisque multitudinem in communi belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit cognoverint."|"De numero . . . quod . . . possidere: indirect discourse, depending on dicebant. Direct:De numero eorum omnia habemus explorata, propterea quod propinqui-, tatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti quantam quisque multitudinem in communi Belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit cognovimus."

"NOT FOUND"|"29. brevissimus . . . traiectus : i.e. the passage across the Straits of Dover; probably from Wissant to Dover; possibly Boulogne to Dover."

"NOT FOUND"|"auxiliis: Crassus, having but little confidence in the auxiliaries, placed them in the center, and not, as usual, on the wings."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK I, 28, 29Chapter 29. *** tabulae: tablets. Among the Romans, tablets for writing ordinarily consisted of thin boards, joined by hinges and covered with wax on the inner surface. A sharp, metallic instrument, called stilus, served as a pen."

"NOT FOUND"|"Where was this battle fought? What kind of soldiers did the Helvetii prove to be? In which direction and to what place did they flee?"

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . discederent: i.e. to come into the interior of Gaul to aid in repelling the Romans."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit ut NON MEDIOCRITER omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"non mediocriter: in no ordinary degree."

"tandem vulneribus defessi et pedem referre et, quod mons suberit circiter mille passuum spatio, eo SE RECIPERE coeperunt."|"se reciperq: how does this expression differ in meaning from pedem referre ?"

"illi, ut erat imperatum, eductis iis cohortibus quae praesidio castris relictae INTRITAE AB labore erant, et longiore itinere circumductis, ne ex hostium castris conspici possent, omnium oculis mentibusque ad pugnam intentis celeriter ad eas quas diximus munitiones pervenerunt  atque his prorutis prius in hostium castris constiterunt quam plane ab his videri aut quid rei gereretur cognosci posset."|"intritae ab labore: not worn out by labor."

"genus hoc erat pugnae, quo se germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, totidem numero pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, quos ex omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas UT IUBIS sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"20. ut iubis .. . adaequarent: that supported by the manes of the horses they equaled their speed."

"is m. messala, [et p.] m. pisone consulibus regni cupiditate inductus coniurationem nobilitatis fecit et civitati persuasit ut de finibus suis cum omnibus copiis exirent:  PERFACILE ESSE, cum virtute omnibus praestarent, totius galliae imperio potiri."|"perfacile esse . . . potiri: this is an instance of the indirect discourse, Oratio Obliqua, very common in Caesar. Remember that the leading clauses of the indirect discourse generally take the infinitive depending on some verb of saying, while all subordinate clauses take the subjunctive. Here esse depends on a verb of saying implied in persuasit; he persuaded them, etc., saying that it would be very easy, etc. The subject of esse is the clause, totius ... potiri, with which perfacile agrees as a predicate adjective. H. 394,4;189, d; (H. 438, 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"resistere: the object is the antecedent implied in quicumque, those who or any who,Haec tamen dicere: that they admitted this however."

"nam PROPTER FRIGORA [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"propter frigora: on account of the cold climate. Gaul, with its forests and marshes, doubtless had a colder climate than modern France."

"tum demum necessario germani suas copias castris eduxerunt generatimque constituerunt paribus intervallis, harudes, marcomanos, tribocos, vangiones, nemetes, sedusios, suebos, omnemque ACIEM SUAM raedis et carris circumdederunt, ne qua spes in fuga relinqueretur."|"aciem suam . . . circumdederunt, surrounded their line with wagons and carts. But circumdare means not only to surround, as in this example, but, also, to place around. It then takes the accusative of the object thus placed, with the dative of an indirect object, as, murum urbi circumdare, to place or build a wall around the city."

"populi romani hanc esse consuetudinem, ut socios atque amicos non modo sui nihil deperdere, sed gratia, dignitate, honore auctiores velit esse; quod vero ad amicitiam populi romani attulissent, id IIS ERIPI quis pati posset?"|"iis eripi: see equitibus detractis, p. 88,1. 14."

"NOT FOUND"|"praefectos: i.e. the prefects of cavalry; see 84."

"ea re constituta, secunda vigilia magno cum, strepitu ac tumultu castris egressi nullo certo ordine neque imperio, cum sibi quisque primum itineris loCUM PETERET et domum pervenire properaret, fecerunt ut consimilis fugae profectio videretur."|"cum . . . peteret: causal clause; see cum . . . coicerent, p. 103,1. 26."

"NOT FOUND"|"subsequi : note the force of sub, forthwith, immediately."

"labienus, ut erat ei praeceptum a caesare ne proelium committeret, nisi ipsius copiae prope hostium castra visae essent, ut undique UNO TEMPORE in hostes impetus fieret, monte occupato nostros expectabat proelioque abstinebat."|"30. uno tempore: at one time, like the English at once."

"multae res ad hoc consilium gallos hortabantur: SUPERIORUM DIERUM sabini cunctatio, perfugae confirmatio, inopia cibariorum, cui rei parum diligenter ab iis erat provisum, spes venetici belli, et quod fere libenter homines id quod volunt credunt."|"10. superiorum dierum : during ox on the preceding days, lit. of; cf. Helvetiorum iniuriis populi Romani ; p. 77, 1. 8. H. 446, 2; A. 217, b ; G. 363, R. 2; (H. 398, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 165, line 1, Chapter 32. *** Dum . . . geruntur: note the usual historical present with Dum, while."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 9. *** ipse aberat longius: he was too far away, i.e. too far away to act in person. Where was Caesar at that time? See p. 129,1. 18."

"castris munitis vineas agere quaeque AD OPPUGNANDUM usui erant comparare coepit."|"ad oppugnandum usui: useful for the assault; oppugnandum, Gerund with ad; usui, dative of purpose or end. H. 425, 3; LM. 548; A. 233, b\356; B. 191; (H. 384, II, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"facultates . . . comparasse: that he had amassed large means for bribery, lit. for giving lavishly, as was often done for political influence."

"NOT FOUND"|"eo : on this account; viz. quod ... navigandi."

"dum haec geruntur, nostris omnibus occupatis qui erant in agris reliQUI DISCESSERUNT."|"qui . . . discesserunt: the rest (of the Britons) who were in the fields (engaged in their daily occupations) departed\ i.e. to join the army."

"his rebus adducti et auctoritate orgetorigis permoti constituerunt ea quae ad proficiscendum pertinerent comparare, iumentorum et carrorum quam maximum numerum coemere, sementes quam maximas facere, ut in itinere copia frumenti suppeteret, CUM PROXIMIS civitatibus pacem et amicitiam confirmare."|"cum proximis civitatibus: with the adjacent (nearest) states, i.e. of Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipsis: to them, i.e. to the Romans."

"ipse TRIDUO INTERMISSO cum omnibus copiis eos sequi coepit."|"triduo intermisso: after an interval of three days. Notice the two meanings of intermitto, as illustrated in this expression and in itinere inter- misso, 1. 10."

"NOT FOUND"|"27. Haec: note the emphatic position."

"itaque paulisper apud oppidum morati agrosque remorum depopulati, omnibus vicis aedificiisque quo adire potuerant incensis, ad castra caesaris omnibus copiis contenderunt et A MILIBUS passuum minus duobus castra posuerunt;  quae castra, ut fumo atque ignibus significabatur, amplius milibus passuum viii latitudinem patebant."|"a milibus . . . duobus: less than two miles off, i.e. from the camp; minus does not affect the construction; a is probably the preposition."

"NOT FOUND"|"potuerint: explain tense. H. 550; LM. 806; A. 287, c; G. 513; B. 268, 6; (H. 495, VI)."

"NOT FOUND"|"rem ... producere: to protract the war."

"NOT FOUND"|"ad pedes: at his (Caesar***s) feet."

"NOT FOUND"|"vineis . . . exstructo: see 112, 120-125."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibus ... existimabat: a conclusion from the preceding clause, he therefore . . . should be granted to them."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metIRI OPORTEREt, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"iri oportere : that they ought to go, both verbs impersonal."

"NOT FOUND"|"27. Chapter 18. ***uti transeat: object clause of purpose with persuadet."

"interea ea legioNE QUAM secum habebat militibusque, qui ex provincia convenerant, a lacu lemanno, qui in flumen rhodanum influit, ad montem iuram, qui fines sequanorum ab helvetiis dividit, milia passuum xviiii murum in altitudinem pedum sedecim fossamque perducit."|"ne quam ... traduceret: that he should not in future (amplius, more, any more) lead any large number, etc.; substantive clause of purpose in apposition with haec."

"interim milites legionum duarum quae in novissimo agmine PRAESIDIO IMPEDIMENTIS fuerant, proelio nuntiato, cursu incitato in summo colle ab hostibus conspiciebantur,  et t. labienus castris hostium potitus et ex loco superiore quae res in nostris castris gererentur conspicatus x. legionem subsidio nostris misit."|"praesidio impedimentis: see subsidio oppidanis, p. 104,1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"Sibi persuaderi: that he was persuaded, lit. it was persuaded to him; eum ... repudiaturum is the subject of the impersonal persuaderi. Observe that persuadeo takes the dative in the passive as well as in the active, and that in the passive it is impersonal. Mi hi persuadet: he persuades me; mi hi persuadetur: I am persuaded."

"NOT FOUND"|"What instances of indirect discourse have you found in the last two chapters ? What do you mean by indirect discourse ? What are the usual moods in indirect discourse?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Scire sethe verb of saying on which this infinitive depends is implied in obsecrare."

"NOT FOUND"|"28. Chapter 35. *** cum his mandatis: with these instructions."

"cum ab iis quaereret quae civitates quantaeque in armis essent et quid in bello possent, SIC REPERIEBAT: plerosque belgos esse ortos a germanis rhenumque antiquitus traductos propter loci fertilitatem ibi consedisse gallosque qui ea loca incolerent expulisse, solosque esse qui,  patrum nostrorum memoria omni gallia vexata, teutonos cimbrosque intra suos fines ingredi prohibuerint;  qua ex re fieri uti earum rerum memoria magnam sibi auctoritatem magnosque spiritus in re militari sumerent."|"sic reperiebat: sic is explained by the rest of the sentence, Plerosque ... sumerent, which is also the object of reperiebat. This in the direct form would stand thus:Plerique Belgae sunt orti ab Germanis Rhenumque antiquitus traducti propter loci fertilitatem ibi consederunt Gallosque qui ea loca incolebant expulerunt, solique sunt qui patrum nostrorum memoria omni Gallia vexata Teutonos Cimbrosque intra suos fines ingredi prohibuerint; qua ex re fit uti earum rerum memoria magnam sibi auctoritatem magnosque spiritus in re militari sumant."

"NOT FOUND"|"Where was Caesar at the beginning of this chapter, and where at its close? In which direction has he been marching?"

"NOT FOUND"|"accessisset: the subject is Caesar."

"his rebus et suam rem familiarem auxisse et facultates ad largiendum magnas comparasse;  magnum numerum equitatus suo sumptu semper alere et circum se habere,  neque solum domi, sed etiam apud finitimas civitates largiter posse, atque huius potentiae causa matrem in biturigibus homini illic nobilissimo ac potentissimo conlocasse;  ipsum ex helvetiis uxorem habere, sororum ex matre et propinquas suas NUPTUM IN alias civitates conlocasse."|"nuptum in alias civitates conlocasse: here Caesar follows the common construction with nubere, like Cicero***s nubere in familiam, but above in Bituribus conlocasse he follows the usual construction of conlocare."

"NOT FOUND"|"totidem Nervios: totidem is the object, and Nervios the subject of polliceri, to be supplied from the preceding clause."

"compluribus his proeliis pulsis ab ocelo, quod est oppidum CITERIORIS PROVINCIAE extremum, in fines vocontiorum ulterioris provinciae die septimo pervenit; inde in allobrogum fines, ab allobrogibus in segusiavos exercitum ducit."|"citerioris provinciae: i.e. Citerior or Cisalpine Gaul."

"ipse interim in colle medio triplicem ACIEM INSTRUXIT legionum quattuor veteranarum; in summo iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque in unum locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"' aciem instruit: see 64 and 65."

"NOT FOUND"|"Bellovacos: the rest of the chapter is in the indirect discourse. Direct as follows:Bellovaci omni tempore in fide atque amicitia civitatis Haeduae fuerunt; impulsi ab suis principibus, qui dicebant Haeduos a Caesare in servitutem redactos omnes indignitates contumeliasque perferre, et ab Haeduis defecerunt et populo Romano bellum intulerunt. Qui eius consilii principes fuerant, quod intellegebant quantam calamitatem civitati intulissent, in Britanniam profugerunt."

"[caesar] certior factus ab titurio omnem equitatum et LEVIS ARMATURAE numidas, funditores sagittariosque pontem traducit atque ad eos contendit."|"levis armaturae Numidas: the light-armed Numidians. The lightarmed soldiers carried a light, round shield, and wore a leathern cap. They were armed with swords and javelins; see plate IV, 2."

"quod ubi caesar animadvertit, naves longas, quarum et species erat barbaris inusitatior et motus ad usum expeditior, paulum removeri ab onerariis navibus et remis incitari et ad latus apertum hostium constitui atque inde fundis, sagittis, tormentis hostes propelli ac submoveri iussit; quae res magno USUI NOSTRIS fuit."|"usui nostris: see nobis usui, p. 105, 1. 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ... appellatus esset: explains suo .. . beneficio."

"cuius adventu spe inlata militibus ac redintegrato animo, cum pro se quisque in conspectu imperatoris etiam in extremis SUIS REBUS operam navare cuperet, paulum hostium impetus tardatus est."|"9. suis, rebus: explain the position of suis and the case of rebus."

"NOT FOUND"|"quam Gallos obtinere dictum est: which, it has been saidthe Gauls (i.e. the Celtic Gauls) occupy. Observe that Gallos is here used in the restricted sense of the word; see note on Celtae, Galli, line 3 above."

"NOT FOUND"|"hanc gratiam: such a requital as this, explained by the clause, ut . . . gravaretur ... putaret."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 114, line I. *** quod tempus: the time which; antecedent retained in the relative clause. This construction is very common, and is regularly used when the antecedent would otherwise be in apposition with a preceding clause, as in this instance it would be in apposition with the clause Ubi *** *** . visa sunt.N882. ut intra silvas ... confirmaverant: just as (i.e. in the same order as) they had arranged their line of battle, and their ranks within the woods, and as they had determined to do."

"factum eius hostis periculum patrum nostrorum memoria cimbris et teutonis a c. mario pulsis [cum non minorem laudem exercitus quam ipse imperator meritus videbatur]; factum etiam nuper in italia servili tumultu, QUOS TAMEN aliquid usus ac disciplina, quam a nobis accepissent, sublevarint."|"quos tamen . . . sublevarent: render passively, who yet were somewhat aided by, etc. The antecedent of quos is implied in servili, during the revolt of the slaves; aliquid: somewhat; adverbial accusative."

"NOT FOUND"|"Where was Caesar at the beginning of the fifteenth chapter, and where at the end of the sixteenth?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Crassi: Marcus Licinius Crassus, the distinguished commander in the Servile War, who defeated and slew Spartacus, 71 B.C. For the omission of exercitu before M. Crassi, see H. 445; (H. 398, 1, N. 1)."

"in eo itinere persuadet castico, catamantaloedis filio, sequano, cuius pater regnum in sequanis multos annos obtinuerat et a senatu populi romani amicus appellatus erat, ut regnum in civitate sua occuparet, quod pater ante habuerit;  itemque dumnorigi haeduo, fratri diviciaci, qui eo tempore principatum in civitate obtinebat ac maxime plebi acceptus erat, ut idem conaretur persuadet eique filiam suam IN MATRIMONIUM dat."|"in matrimonium dpxerat: had married, lit. had led into wedlock? Duco is thus used only of the bridegroom, while nubo, to veil, is used of the bride."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boios petentibus Haeduis . . . concessit: he granted the petition of the Haedui (lit. granted to the Haedui) that they might settle the Boii, etc. Here the construction is somewhat doubtful. Haeduis may be dative with concessit or in the ablative absolute, and ut . . . conlocarent may be the object either of petentibus or of concessit."

"ita UTRAQUE RE oppidorum oppugnatio impediebatur."|"utraque re: by either method, i.e. whether by land or sea."

"NOT FOUND"|"coeptae essent: why not coepissent? H. 299, I; A. 143, a; G. 423, N. 3; B. 133, 1; (H. 297, I, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"30. secundum: construe with ventum and aestum."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem NON MINUS ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"4. Non minus . . . viderent: indirect discourse depending on a verb of saying to be supplied. Direct form:Non minus id contendimus et laboramus, ne ea quae dixerimus enuntientur, quam uti ea quae volumus impetremus, propterea quod, si enuntiatum erit, summum in cruciatum nos venturos videmus."

"collis AB SUMMO aequaliter declivis ad flumen sabim, quod supra nominavimus, vergebat."|"ab summo . .. declivis: descending evenly from its summit or with a regular descentetc. Declivis, descending; acclivis, ascending; hence, acclivitate, below, line 4."

"NOT FOUND"|"13. Chapter 39. *** Dum . . . moratur; what tense is regularly used after dum, meaning while, and in general how is it best rendered?"

"NOT FOUND"|"2. Id: note the prominent position of this word, referring back to flumen, thus connecting the two sentences closely together. H. 669, I; LM. 1151; A. 344; G. 672, 2; B. 350, 9; (H. 561, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"victis, venientes: victis refers to the Helvetii; venientes to the Boii andCAESAR***S GALLIC WARWhy did Caesar and his officers dismount before the battle? What advantage had the Roman mode of attack over that of the Helvetii?"

"NOT FOUND"|"sibi: construe with stipendiarios."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gaium Valerium Procillum: object of mittere."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . .. traduxisset: an indirect clause, giving the thought in the mind of Caesar at the time of the events; see note on quod. . . temptassent, p. 65, 1. 23. The subject is a pronoun referring to Dumnorix."

"caesari omnia uno tempore erant agenda: vexillum proponendum, quod erat insigne, cum ad arma concurri oporteret; signum tuba dandum; ab opere revocandi milites; qui paulo longius AGGERIS PETENDI causa processerant arcessendi; acies instruenda; milites cohortandi; signum dandum."|"aggeris petendi causa: for the purpose of seeking materials for therampart, i.e. for the defenses of the camp; see 97.	'"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 60, line I. *** diem qua die: cf. itinera quibus itineribus, p. 59,1.15."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. aliae {sublicae) ... supra pontem mediocri spatio: these piles above the bridge, probably not connected with it, were intended to protect it in the manner described in the text. The brevity of Caesar***s description leaves us in doubt whether the several sections of the bridge were protected by single piles or by groups of three or more, as represented in the plan."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ariovisti: subjective genitive."

"quod sua victoria tam insolenter gloriarentur quodque tam diu SE IMPUNE iniurias tulisse admirarentur, eodem pertinere."|"se impune ... intulisse: that they had done wrong with impunity. eodem pertinere: tended to the same result."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWApari acclivitate: of like ascent; ablative of characteristic; see magna auctoritate, p. no, 1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"It will be observed that Caesar placed only his four veteran legions in line of battle, while the two legions recently enrolled in Cisalpine Gaul, and all the auxiliary infantry, were stationed in the rear."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent SIBI ESSE in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"sibi esse curae: explain both datives; see Gallis magno *** . *** impedi- mento, p. 74.1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 66, line 1. *** Cum . . . sint: concessive clause. H. 598; LM. 863; A. 326; G. 587; B. 309, 3; (H. 515, III). tamen: construe with sese ... esse facturum, sibi: to himt i.e. to Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"poenam . . . ut igni cremaretur: among the Gauls this seems to have been the usual punishment of traitors; poenam sequi is the subject of oportebat, and ut igni cremaretur is a substantive clause of purpose, in apposition with poenam. H. 564, III; LM. 895; Ov. 329;, B. 294; (H/499, 3)."

"caesar, quod neque conloquium INTERPOSITA CAUSA tolli volebat neque salutem suam gallorum equitatui committere audebat, commodissimum esse statuit omnibus equis gallis equitibus detractis eo legionarios milites legionis x., cui quam maxime confidebat, imponere, ut praesidium quam amicissimum, si quid opus facto esset, haberet."|"interposita causa tolli: to be prevented by a mere pretext\ i.e. he did not wish to give Ariovistus any excuse for declining an interview."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. arcessitam: sent for."

"NOT FOUND"|"commodo: ablative of attendant circumstance. H. 473, 3; LM. 635; A. 248; G. 399; B. 220, i; (H. 419, III)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quin . .. consentirent: from conspiring with these, lit. by which (so that) they may not conspire. H. 595, II; LM. 913; A. 332,g; G. 555, i; B. 295, 3; (H. 504,4)."

"NOT FOUND"|"rostro: with the beak. The beaks of ancient war vessels, consisting of solid beams armed with pointed irons, were very formidable, and were generally used to dash in the sides of the enemy***s ships; see 127, and plate IX."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut seme! . . . vicerit: when once he has conquered\ etc.: here observe that the perfect indicative of the direct discourse has become the perfect subjunctive in the indirect, and that from this point to the end of the chapter the speaker, having become interested in his subject, retains all the tenses of the direct discourse. H. 644, I; LM. 1032; A. 336, a; G. 654; B. 318; (H. 523, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"29. ut . . . paterentur: clause of purpose."

"quin etiam, quod necessariam rem coactus caesari enuntiarit, INTELLEGERE SESE quanto id cum periculo fecerit, et ob eam causam quam diu potuerit tacuisse."|"8. Intellegere sese ... haberent: this long speech of the Gallic envoys is in the indirect discourse, depending on a verb of saying implied in gratulatum. We have already compared certain forms of indirect discourse with corresponding direct forms. It may now interest the student to see or to make more extended comparisons of direct and indirect forms. This speech of the Gallic envoys, if reported in the form of direct discourse, would read asfollows:Intellegimus, tametsi pro veteribus Helvetiorum iniuriis populi Romani ab his poenas bello repetisti, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu terrae Galliae quam populi Romani accidisse, propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas Helvetii reliquerunt, uti toti Galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent, quem ex omni Gallia opportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cum . . . possent: explain mood; see cum . . . possent, p. 62, 1. 2**igitized by GOOglCCAESAR***S GALLIC WARse suaque: themselves and their possessions; sua: neuter plural, used substantively."

"NOT FOUND"|"igitized by GoogleN 125solvit: set sail; probably from Port Itius, from which he embarked on hii second expedition into Britain; see B. v. 2,1. 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"25. ad Rhenum quas regiones: to the vicinity of the Rhine, to the districts which."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani AB HIS poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"Ab his . . . Velanii: these begin by arresting Silius and Velanius, lit a beginning of retaining Silius and Velanius is made by these."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 127, line I. *** Accedebat quod: an additional reason was that,quod ***.. dolebant et... habebant: the subject of Accedebat."

"ubi nostros non esse inferiores intellexit, loco pro castris ad aciem instruendam natura oportuno atque idoneo, quod is collis ubi castra posita erant paululum ex planitie editus tantum adversus in latitudinem patebat quantum loci ACIES INstructa occupare poterat, atque ex utraque parte lateris deiectus habebat et in fronte leniter fastigatus paulatim ad planitiem redibat, ab utroque latere eius collis transversam fossam obduxit circiter passuum cccc  et ad extremas fossas castella constituit ibique tormenta conlocavit, ne, cum aciem instruxisset, hostes, quod tantum multitudine poterant, ab lateribus pugnantes suos circumvenire possent."|"21. acies:- in partitive apposition with Romani."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... pervenerint: result; for tense, see ut... potuerint, p. 101,1.12."

"pedestria esse itinera concisa aestuariis, navigationem impeditam propter inscientiam locorum paucitatemque portuum sciebant,  neque nostros exercitus propter inopiam frumenti diutius apud se morari posse confidebant;  ac iam ut omnia contra opinionem acciderent, tamen se plurimum navibus posse, [quam] romanos neque ullam facultatem habere navium, neque eorum locorum ubi bellum gesturi essent vada, portus, insulas novisse;  ac LONGE ALIAM esse navigationem in concluso mari atque in vastissimo atque apertissimo oceano perspiciebant."|"15. longe aliam . . . atque . . . Oceano: very different from what it was in the, etc., lit. navigation in a closed sea and in the very vast and open sea was widely different (longe alium)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Britanniae: to Britain, i.e. to the invasion of Britain.."

"NOT FOUND"|"quas . . . faciant:, indirect question; see in utrem partem fluat, p. 64, 1. 1."

"labienus, UT ERAT ei praeceptum a caesare ne proelium committeret, nisi ipsius copiae prope hostium castra visae essent, ut undique uno tempore in hostes impetus fieret, monte occupato nostros expectabat proelioque abstinebat."|"ut erat ei praeceptum: as he had been ordered, lit. as orders had been given to him. The subject of erat praeceptum is the clause ne ... committeret, a substantive clause of purpose; see note on proelium committunt, p. 66,1. 15."

"id EA MAXIME ratione fecit, quod noluit eum locum unde helvetii discesserant vacare, ne propter bonitatem agrorum germani, qui trans rhenum incolunt, ex suis finibus in helvetiorum fines transirent et finitimi galliae provinciae allobrogibusque essent."|"11. ea maxime ratione: principally for this reason, explained by quod noluit, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"quantum ... distabat: which was the distance between the piles, i.e. the interval between the two piles was two feet, and accordingly a beam two feet thick (bipedalis) was let in between them, and connected this pair of piles with the opposite pair, forty feet lower down the river."

"NOT FOUND"|"cupiditate: what ki?*d of an ablative? H. 475, i; LM. 613; A. 245; G. 408; B. 219; (H. 416, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"confertissima n give tlje literal meaning of the verb from which this adjective is derived."

"NOT FOUND"|"quam ... transisse: which, as I have mentioned above, had crossed the Meuse: see p. 150,1. 14."

"his constitutis rebus et consilio cum legatis et quaestore communicato, ne quem diem pugnae praetermitteret, oportunissima res accidit, quod postridie eius diei mane eadem et perfidia et simulatione usi germani frequentes, omnibus principibus maioribusque natu adhibitis, ad eum in castra venerunt,  simul, ut dicebatur, sui purgandi causa, quod contra atque esset dictum et ipsi petissent, proelium pridie commisissent, simul ut, si QUID POSSENT, de indutiis fallendo impetrarent."|"quid . . . possent: what the invincible Germans . . . could accomplish by their valor ; quid, cognate accusative with possent; lit. what power they had."

"divico respondit: ita helvetios a maioribus suis institutos esse uti obsides accipere, non dare, consuerint; EIUS REI populum romanum esse testem."|"Eius rei: of this, i.e. of their sadness.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARrespondere: the nominative Seqoani without a finite verb shows that respondere is an historical infinitive; see note on Caesar . . . flagitare, p. 66, 1. 26."

"NOT FOUND"|"dum ... augerentur: see dum ... pervenirent, p. 63,1. 24."

"quae cum adpropinquarent britanniae et ex castris viderentur, tanta tempestas subito coorta est ut nulla earum cursum tenere posset, sed aliae eodem unde erant profectae referrentur, aliae ad inferiorem partem insulae, quae est propius solis occasum, magno suo cum periculo deicerentur;    quae tamen ancoris iactis cum fluctibus complerentur, necessario ADVERSA NOCTE in altum provectae continentem petierunt."|"adversa nocte: in the face of the night, or though night was closing in."

"sabinus idoneo omnibus rebus loco castris sese tenebat, cum viridovix contra eum duorum milium spatio consedisset cotidieque productis copiis pugnandi potestatem faceret, ut iam non solum hostibus in contemptionem sabinus veniret, sed etiam nostrorum militum vocibus NON NIHIL carperetur;  tantamque opinionem timoris praebuit ut iam ad vallum castrorum hostes accedere auderent."|"18. non nihil: somewhat."

"caesar ad lingonas litteras nuntiosque misit, ne eos frumento neve alia re iuvarent: qui si iuvissent, se EODEM LOCO quo helvetios habiturum."|"eodem loco quo: locative ablatives; cf. nullis locis, p. 59,1. 22."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. spatium: object of continet."

"itaque convocatis centurionibus celeriter milites CERTIORES FACIT, paulisper intermitterent proelium ac tantum modo tela missa exciperent seque ex labore reficerent, post dato signo ex castris erumperent, atque omnem spem salutis in virtute ponerent."|"certiores facit: instructed\ or ordered\ historical present. Give the more common meaning of certior facere, with its usual construction."

"NOT FOUND"|"Est. .. consuetudinis: this is (of) a Gallic custom ; predicate genitive; cf. esse Ariovisti, p. 91,1. 13."

"QUIBUS REBUS adductus caesar non expectandum sibi statuit dum, omnibus fortunis sociorum consumptis, in santonos helvetii pervenirent."|"Quibus rebus: by these considerations; see qua de causa, p. 55,1. 12. non exspectandum sibi: that he ought not to wait."

"NOT FOUND"|"deficerent, instarent, etc.: observe that these imperfects have the ordinary force of this tense, and not the idiomatic use of it seen in pugnaretur."

"maiori tamen parti placuit, hoc reservato ad extremum casum consilio interim REI EVENTUM experiri et castra defendere."|"rei eventum experiri: to await the issue."

"NOT FOUND"|"pluribus . . . conligatis: a single javelin penetrating several shields which overlapped each other, sometimes fastened them together by the bending of the iron. The scutum is a large rectangular shield, four feet in length and two and one half in width; see 86, 7."

"dum ea geruntur, legione ex consuetudine una frumentatum missa, quae appellabatur vii, neque ulla ad id tempus belli suspicione interposita, cum pars hominum in agris remaneret, PARS ETIAM in castra ventitaret, ii qui pro portis castrorum in statione erant caesari nuntiaverunt pulverem maiorem quam consuetudo ferret in ea parte videri quam in partem legio iter fecisset."|"pars etiam ... ventitaret: some came often even into our camp ; note the frequentative form and meaning."

"NOT FOUND"|"Suessiones: object of deterrere, below."

"NOT FOUND"|"omnibus . .. expeditis: with the free use of all their limbs."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... faciunt: this explains libertate vitae, which presents a most remarkable contrast with the severe discipline which characterized the Roman family."

"EX QUO iudicari posse quantum haberet in se boni constantia, propterea quod quos aliquamdiu inermes sine causa timuissent hos postea armatos ac victores superassent."|"Ex quo . . . potuerint: Direct discourse:Ex quo iudicare potest quantum habeat in se boni constantia, propterea quod, quos aliquamdiu inermes sine causa timuistis, hos postea armatos ac victores superavistis."

"NOT FOUND"|"castris: ablative of separation with eduxerunt. Ex castris is more common with this verb."

"NOT FOUND"|"29. Caesarem: construe with posse."

"ipse interim in colle medio TRIPLICEM ACIEM instruxit legionum quattuor veteranarum; in summo iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque in unum locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"triplicem aciem: a triple line of battle, each legion in three lines, as seen in 64, 65."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo .. . genere: a class of warriors whom, referring both to equitatu and to essedariis."

"quod ubi caesar resciit, quorum per fines ierant his uti conquirerent et reducerent, si sibi purgati esse vellent, imperavit; reductos in hostium numero habuit;   RELIQUOS OMNES obsidibus, armis, perfugis traditis in deditionem accepit."|"reliquos omnes in deditionem accepit: he accepted the surrender of all the rest; lit. received all the rest into, etc. They thus became subjects of Rome."

"hostes, ubi et de expugnando oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse intellexerunt neque nostros in locum iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa viderunt atque ipsos res frumentaria deficere coepit, concilio convocato CONSTITUERUNT OPTIMUM esse domum suam quemque reverti, et quorum in fines primum romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur."|"constituerunt optimum esse . . . et . . . convenirent: they decided that it was best, etc., and . . . they resolved to assemble. Observe that constituerunt here admits a double construction, optimum esse and convenirent."

"NOT FOUND"|"***16. intervallo . . . iungebat: this means that the two piles were made fast to each other, but were at the same time kept two feet apart; see plan in the text."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 34. *** placuit ei ut mitteret: he (Caesar) decided to send, lit. that he should send pleased him; ut . . . mitteret, aTclause of purpose, is the subject of placuit."

"gallis magno ad pugnam erat impedimento quod pluribus eorum scutis uno ictu pilorum transfixis et conligatis, cum ferrum se inflexisset, neque evellere neque sinistra impedita SATIS COMMODE pugnare poterant,  multi ut diu iactato bracchio praeoptarent scutum manu emittere et nudo corpore pugnare."|"satis commode: with sufficient ease."

"NOT FOUND"|"qua . . . conveniant: volitive subjunctive in a relative clause of purpose; cf. ut . .. paterentur, above, p. 59, 1. 29. H. 590; LM. 835; A. 317, 2;G. 630; B. 282, 2; (H. 497, 1)."

"una erat MAGNO USUI res praeparata a nostris, falces praeacutae insertae adfixaeque longuriis, non absimili forma muralium falcium."|"23. magno usui: of great service; see magno nobis usui, with note,p. 105,1. 24**Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAN 107non absimili .. . falcium: of a form not unlike that of mural hooks ; explain the case of forma. Mural hooks were strong, iron hooks, fastened to long poles, used in pulling down the walls of besieged towns."

"eo de media nocte caesar isdem ducibus usus qui nuntii ab iccio venerant, numidas et cretas sagittarios et funditores baleares SUBSIDIO OPPIDANIS mittit;  quorum adventu et remis cum spe defensionis studium propugnandi accessit et hostibus eadem de causa spes potiundi oppidi discessit."|"subsidio oppidanis: as a relief for the citizens, lit. to the citizens for a relief. H. 433; LM. 548; A. 233, a; G. 356; B. 191, 2; (H. 390)."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. ipsis, eorum: referring to Haeduis; ipsis, upon them, emphatic, in distinction from their allies."

"NOT FOUND"|"ubi... conspexerant... adoriebantur : whenever they saw ... they attacked them, etc.; imperfect and pluperfect, denoting repeated action or general truth."

"NOT FOUND"|"rebus . . . conlocandis ; dative of the gerundive construction, indirect object of daretur. H. 627; LM. 996; A. 299, a; G. 429; B. 339, 2; (H. 544** 2)**decurrere, coicere, propugnare: historical infinitives; name the other historical infinitives in this chapter. Why are they here used? H. 610; LM. 708; A. 275; G. 647; B. 335; (H. 536, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"18. in Illyricum : Caesar***s province included Illyricum: see 26."

"NOT FOUND"|"Omni . . . interdixisset: had forbidden the Romans all Gaul, Gallia, ablative of separation; Romanis, dative with interdixisset, subjunctive in an indirect question."

"quibus proeliis calamitatibusque FRACTOS, QUI et sua virtute et populi romani hospitio atque amicitia plurimum ante in gallia potuissent, coactos esse sequanis obsides dare nobilissimos civitatis et iure iurando civitatem obstringere sese neque obsides repetituros neque auxilium a populo romano imploraturos neque recusaturos quo minus perpetuo sub illorum dicione atque imperio essent."|"22. fractos, qui: the antecedent of qui, implied in fractos, is the subject of coactos esse."

"QUARUM RERUM magnam partem temporis brevitas et incursus hostium impediebat."|"quarum rerum nihil: no one of these things."

"ad eas res conficiendas biennium sibi satis esse duxerunt; IN TERTIUM annum profectionem lege confirmant."|"in tertium annum ... confirmant: by formal enactment (lege) they appointed the third year as the time for their departure, lit. they appoint their departure for the third year."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ... susceperit: subjunctive of cause with cum."

"haec cum machinationibus immissa in flumen defixerat fistucisque adegerat, non sublicae modo derecte ad perpendiculum, sed prone ac fastigate, ut secundum naturam fluminis procumberent,  iis item contraria duo ad eundem modum iuncta intervallo pedum quadragenum ab inferiore parte CONTRA VIM atque impetu fluminis conversa statuebat."|"contra vim . . . conversa: turned against the force and current of the river ; see plan in text."

"QUAE RES et latus unum castrorum ripis fluminis muniebat et post eum quae erant tuta ab hostibus reddebat et commeatus ab remis reliquisque civitatibus ut sine periculo ad eum portari possent efficiebat."|"quae res: this fact, referring to the mode of life just mentioned; res, subject of alit, efficit."

"commodissimum visum est c. valerium procillum, c. valerii caburi filium, summa virtute et humanitate adulescentem, cuius pater a c. valerio flacco civitate donatus erat, et propter fidem et propter linguae gallicae scientiam, QUA MULTA iam ariovistus longinqua consuetudine utebatur, et quod in eo peccandi germanis causa non esset, ad eum mittere, et una m. metium, qui hospitio ariovisti utebatur."|"qua multa iam ... utebatur: which Ariovistus already spoke fluently; qua refers to linguae, and multa agrees with it, lit. which much,quod . .. non esset: Caesar***s reason at the time, not assigned by him as narrator; hence the subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"prohibere: the object is readily supplied from the context.	****** alterum: like unum, 1. 16, in partitive apposition with itinera, 1. 15."

"accedebat ut, cum [saevire ventus coepisset et] se vento dedissent, et TEMPESTATEM FERRENT facilius et in vadis consisterent tutius et ab aestu relictae nihil saxa et cautes timerent; quarum rerum omnium nostris navibus casus erat extimescendus."|"tempestatem ferrent: they weathered the storm."

"sibi quidem persuaderi cognitis suis postulatis atque aequitate condicionum perspecta eum NEQUE SUAM neque populi romani gratiam repudiaturum."|"Neque suam neque: the rest of the chapter is in the indirect discourse. Write it in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"eo : i.e. in Venetos."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why was so great care always exercised in selecting a position for a Roman camp?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ducerentur: potential subjunctive, like possent, 1. 16."

"quod si eum interfecerit, multis sese nobilibus principibusque populi romani gratum esse facturum (id se ab ipsis PER EORUM nuntios compertum habere), quorum omnium gratiam atque amicitiam eius morte redimere posset."|"per eorum nuntios: if Ariovistus speaks the truth, the nobles must have had their agents in Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"congressi: having met him (Caesar)."

"NOT FOUND"|"17. qui dedidissent: because they had surrendered; a relative clause, assigning a reason. H. 592; LM. 839, A. 320, e; G. 633; B. 283, 3; (H. 517)."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. exitus: the conclusion."

"NOT FOUND"|"subiciebant: note the force of sub, were hurling from below ; i.e. from their position inter carros."

"instructo exercitu magis ut loci natura [deiectusque collis] et necessitas temporis quam ut rei militaris RATIO ATQUE ordo postulabat, cum diversae legiones aliae alia in parte hostibus resisterent saepibusque densissimis, ut ante demonstravimus, interiectis prospectus impediretur, neque certa subsidia conlocari neque quid in quaque parte opus esset provideri neque ab uno omnia imperia administrari poterant."|"ratio atque ordo postulabat: see ratio ordoque,.. habebat', p. 112,1.12."

"NOT FOUND"|"sua dementia: his usual clemency; see iure . . . utantur, p. 101,1. 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAN tigQuos : these, the Germans; subject of oblatos."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 6. *** quibus itineribus: by which. Note the repetition of the antecedent in the relative clause, the original construction. In translating avoid the repetition. H. 399, 1; LM. 822; A. 200; G. 615; B. 251, 3; (H. 445, 8).	***possent: potential subjunctive, in a relative clause of. characteristic."

"postquam omnes belgarum copias in unum locum coactas ad se venire vidit NEQUE IAM longe abesse ab iis quos miserat exploratoribus et ab remis cognovit, flumen axonam, quod est in extremis remorum finibus, exercitum traducere maturavit atque ibi castra posuit."|"neque iam . . . cognovit: and ascertained that they were not far distant'."

"veneti reliquaeque item civitates cognito caesaris adventu [certiores facti], simul quod quantum in se facinus admisissent intellegebant, [legatos, QUOD NOMEN ad omnes nationes sanctum inviolatumque semper fuisset, retentos ab se et in vincula coniectos,] pro magnitudine periculi bellum parare et maxime ea quae ad usum navium pertinent providere instituunt, hoc maiore spe quod multum natura loci confidebant."|"quod nomen: a name which, referring to legatos."

"QUAM OB rem placuit ei ut ad ariovistum legatos mitteret, qui ab eo postularent uti aliquem locum medium utrisque conloquio deligeret: velle sese de re publica et summis utriusque rebus cum eo agere."|"quam Ob rem .. . decertaret: why Ariovistus did not offer a general engagement; proelium is a general engagement, as distinguished from the skirmishing mentioned above."

"postridie eius diei, quod omnino biduum supererat, cum exercitui frumentum metiri oporteret, et quod a bibracte, oppido haeduorum longe maximo et copiosissimo, non AMPLIUS MILIBUS passuum xviii aberat, rei frumentariae prospiciendum existimavit; itaque iter ab helvetiis avertit ac bibracte ire contendit."|"amplius milibus: milibus depends on the comparative amplius."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 69, line 3. *** Reperiebat: the object is the clause initium... factum."

"NOT FOUND"|"This remarkable speech, one of the most famous recorded in ancient history, wrought a marvelous change in the feelings of the disheartened and terrified soldiers. What does Caesar say about Ariovistus? What about the Germans? What about supplies? What does he propose to do in view of this sudden panic?"

"hic pagus unus, CUM DOMO exisset, patrum nostrorum memoria l. cassium consulem interfecerat et eius exercitum sub iugum miserat."|"cum domo exisset: having left its home; cf. cum . . . conaretur, p. 58,27, and cum id nuntiatum esset, p"". tio, 1. 5, and note with what frequency Caesar uses cum with the subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Liscum retinet: but retains Liscus, another instance of asyndeton, the omission of the conjunction."

"caesar equitatu praemisso subsequebatur omnibus copiis; sed ratio ordoque agminis ALITER SE habebat ac belgae ad nervios detulerant."|"aliter se habebat ac: was unlike that which, lit. had itself otherwise than."

"favere et cupere helvetiis propter eam adfinitatem, odisse etiam suo nomine caesarem et romanos, quod eorum adventu potentia eius deminuta et diviciacus frater IN ANTIQUUM locum gratiae atque honoris sit restitutus."|"in antiquum, etc.: to his former place of influence. He had formerly possessed great influence and power; see p. 70, 1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with Caesar***s indirect discourse, and write the two remaining sentences of this chapter in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"lenitate: ablative of characteristic; see bono animox p. 59,1. 27."

"NOT FOUND"|"doloris: what kind of a genitive?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae: here used in its limited sense, of Celtic Gaul."

"QUOD SIBI caesar denuntiaret se haeduorum iniurias non neglecturum, neminem secum sine sua pernicie contendisse."|"Quod sibi, etc.: as to Caesar's threat, lit. as to this that Caesar threatened him, etc. Quod is an adverbial accusative. There seems to be some little confusion in the use of the reflexive in this sentence; sibi refers to Ariovistus, and se to Caesar, while in the next clause pecum refers to Ariovistus and sua to neminem."

"NOT FOUND"|"per ... perequitant: they (the essedarii) drive through, etc.; in this descriptive chapter, note the free use of the present tense, denoting customary action."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 25. *** Caesar: subject of processit and iussit. Caesar here resumes from p. 115, L 7, the account of the part which he himself took in the battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . administraretur: since the work was executed\ etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"What fact does this speech of Liscus disclose?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quod navium longarum: whatever ships of war; navium, partitive genitive, with quod."

"NOT FOUND"|"13. id: i.e. the peril to which his brother Piso was exposed."

"c. ivli caesaris commentariorvm de bello gallico liber primvs gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt belgae, aliam aquitani, tertiam qui IPSORUM LINGUA celtae, nostra galli appellantur."|"ipsorum lingua: ablative of means. H. 476; LM. 645; A. 248, c, i;401; B. 218; (H. 420)."

"NOT FOUND"|"21. sui... imperii aut potestatis: under (of) his sway or power; predicate genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 91, line 1. *** Quod si eum interfecerit... confecturum: write this in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"veniret: jussive subjunctive in the direct discourse.NOTES ***BOOK I, 41-43alia ratione: on any other terms ; ablative of cause."

"id hoc facilius iis persuasit, quod undique loci natura helvetii continentur: UNA EX parte flumine rheno latissimo atque altissimo, qui agrum helvetium a germanis dividit; altera ex parte monte iura altissimo, qui est inter sequanos et helvetios; tertia lacu lemanno et flumine rhodano, qui provinciam nostram ab helvetiis dividit."|"11. una ex parte a Suebis: on one side of the Suebi; cf. ab Sequanis, P** 56** ^14. ut est . . . Germanorum: according to the German standard, i.e. as far as a German state can be ampla atque florens."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut: how; multo, ablative of difference."

"NOT FOUND"|"I7- Quod si antiquissimum quodque tempus, etc.: but if priority of time should always be regarded\ lit. every most ancient time. On the score of priority of time the Romans have the advantage by upwards of sixtyyears."

"allobrogibus sese vel persuasuros, QUOD NONdum bono animo in populum romanum viderentur, existimabant vel vi coacturos ut per suos fines eos ire paterentur."|"23- Quod non fore . . . esse perspectam: write this in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. hostibus: to the enemy; dative of relation."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. Chapter 5. *** obsides: as hostages."

"NOT FOUND"|"nulli: note the emphatic position. H. 665, 2; LM. 1147; G. 672, 2; B. 349; (H. 561, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"sine . . . legionibus: it will be remembered that Crassus had in addition to his cavalry, only twelve cohorts; see chapter 11."

"NOT FOUND"|"The Helvetii, in dense masses, advanced to the charge. The Roman legions were arranged in three lines. The front line received the onset of the enemy with a salvo of javelins, and then with drawn swords rushed to theOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF 10CAESAR***S GALLIC WARcharge. After a few minutes, the second line of cohorts, advancing through the intervals of the first line, rushed into the thickest of the fight. The enemy were driven back to a hill a mile in the rear; but while the Roman legions were pursuing the retreating Helvetii, the Boii and Tulingi, fifteen thousand strong, who formed the rear guard of the enemy***s line of march, appearing on the scene, made an attack upon the right flank of the Roman line. The Helvetii, encouraged by this timely aid, turned upon their pursuers and renewed the battle. Caesar at once detached his third or rear line to receive the attack of the Boii and Tulingi, while with the other two lines he repulsed for the second time the whole force of the Helvetii."

"NOT FOUND"|"eos: them, i.e. the Helvetii. It is the object of iussisset."

"ad haec cognoscenda, prius quam periculum faceret, idoneum esse arbitratus c. volusenum CUM NAVI longa praemittit."|"cum navi lopga: with a ship of war; see 127."

"praeterea se neque sine exercitu IN EAS partes galliae venire audere quas caesar possideret, neque exercitum sine magno commeatu atque molimento in unum locum contrahere posse."|"in eas partes, etc.: Ariovistus was at this time a long distance from Caesar, probably in the territory of the Triboci, who occupied the district in which Strasburg is now situated."

"veneti reliquaeque item civitates cognito caesaris adventu [certiores facti], simul quod quantum in se facinus admisissent intellegebant, [legatos, quod nomen ad omnes nationes sanctum inviolatumque semper fuisset, retentos ab se et in vincula coniectos,] pro magnitudine periculi bellum parare et maxime ea quae ad usum navium pertinent providere instituunt, HOC MAIORE spe quod multum natura loci confidebant."|"hoc maiore spe : with the greater hope on this account; hoc: ablative of cause, explained by quod ... confidebant."

"NOT FOUND"|"Numidas et.. . Baleares: these served as auxiliaries in Caesar***s army. The Cretans were famous as archers, and the Balearians as slingers."

"NOT FOUND"|"488, 3; (H. 430, N. 2)."

"hi sunt EXTRA PROVINCIAM trans rhodanum primi."|"extra provinciam: Caesar has now passed out of his province, and is already in foreign territory."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. legatum: see 78."

"NOT FOUND"|"agros depopulati, omnibus vicis incensis: we have here two methods by which the Latin may express the meaning denoted in English by the perfect active participle, the perfect deponent participle with object, agros depopulati, and the perfect passive participle in the ablative absolute, vicis incensis. In meaning, these are corresponding constructions, and may generally be rendered in the same way."

"dumnorigi custodes ponit, UT QUAE agat, quibuscum loquatur scire possit."|"ut quae .. . haberent: since they have, lit. as (things) which have, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"priusquam . . . reciperent: before the enemy could recover from their terror and flight: explain mood. H. 605, II; LM. 880; A. 327; G. 577; B. 292; (H. 520, II)."

"SI QUOs adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"si quo erat ... recipiendum: if it was necessary to advance further than usual or to retreat more rapidly."

"haedui, cum se suaque ab iis defendere non possent, legatos ad caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium:  ITA SE omni tempore de populo romano meritos esse ut paene in conspectu exercitus nostri agri vastari, liberi [eorum] in servitutem abduci, oppida expugnari non debuerint."|"Ita se, etc.: that they had at all times deserved so well of the Roman people ; Omni tempore: i.e. since their alliance with the Romans more than sixty years before. The address of the ambassadors is reported in the indirect discourse, depending on the idea of saying involved in rogatum."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod Harudes . . . popularentur: that or because the Harudes, etc., virtually a causal clause, the ground for the complaint of the Haedui; hence the subjunctive; see quod sit destitutus, queritur, p. 67.1. 19. On Harudes, see p. 79,1. 7-qui . . . transportati essent: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... sublevetur . .. quod sit destitutus: the subjunctive implies that these reasons were assigned by the speaker, not by the writer. In other words, Caesar here quotes his own language in the indirect discourse."

"vulgo TOTIS CASTRIS testamenta obsignabantur."|"totis ... castris ... nudatis: as the whole camp was exposed; ablative absolute. It will be remembered that six legions were engaged in fortifying the camp when the attack began (p. 112,1. 24); two of these at once took their position on the left of the camp, two in front of it, and two on the right. Soon the two on the left, the 9th and the 10th (p. 115, 1. 25), routed the Atrebates and went in pursuit of them, while the nth and the 8th, who were stationed in front, went in pursuit of the Veromandui (p. 116, 1. 7). Thus the camp was exposed in front and on the left (a fronte et ab sinistra parte). At this juncture the whole force of the Nervii was led against the 12th and the 7th legions, who occupied a position on the right of the camp, and were, at the moment, its only defense; see plan in text, p. 113."

"prima luce, cum summus mons a [lucio] labieno teneretur, ipse ab hostium castris non longius mille et quingentis passibus abesset neque, ut postea ex captivis comperit, aut ipsius adventus aut labieni cognitus esset,   considius equo admisso ad eum ACCURRIT, DICIT montem, quem a labieno occupari voluerit, ab hostibus teneri: id se a gallicis armis atque insignibus cognovisse."|"accurrit, dicit; teneri, cognovisse; subducit, instruit: observe the omission of the conjunction, implying haste."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae: of Gaul, i.e. of Celtic Gaul; see note on Gallia omnis, p. 55,1. 1."

"caesar id quod erat suspicatus aliquid novi a barbaris initum consilii, COHORTES QUAE in statione erant secum in eam partem proficisci, ex reliquis duas in stationem succedere, reliquas armari et confestim sese subsequi iussit."|"cohortes quae . . *** erant: one cohort guarded each of the four gates of the camp; see note on castris, p. 64, L 6; cohortes: construe with proficisci jussit."

"NOT FOUND"|"19. redintegrare: literal meaning? Meaning here?"

"NOT FOUND"|"neque ... et: not... and."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut.. . patiantur: purpose clause, object of impetrat; cf. ut . . . exirent, P- 57. '*** 4-uti inter sese dent perficit: causes them to exchange., lit. that they may give among themselves."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 154, line 5. *** libertatem concessit: granted liberty, i.e. allowed them to remain with him as free men."

"haec utraque insuper bipedalibus trabibus immissis, quantum eorum tignorum iunctura distabat, BINIS UTRIMQUE fibulis ab extrema parte distinebantur;  quibus disclusis atque in contrariam partem revinctis, tanta erat operis firmitudo atque ea rerum natura ut, quo maior vis aquae se incitavisset, hoc artius inligata tenerentur."|"binis utrimque fibulis: with two ties on either side, i.e. at each end of the beam. The exact meaning of fibula as here used is still in dispute. Various interpretations have been suggested by different writers, as by Napoleon III, Kraner, Rheinhardt, August von Goler, and others. The interpretation adopted in these notes was probably first suggested and advocated by Colonel August von Cohausen, of the Prussian Corps of Engineers, in an elaborate and carefully prepared work on this bridge. Lieutenant F. Zimmerhaeckel, in a special treatise, recently published by Teubner, Leipzig, accepts the view of von Cohausen. Von Goler gives the same meaning to fibula, but his method of attaching it to the piles is more elaborate, requiring some nice work on the part of the joiner."

"eadem autem celeritate ADVERSO COLLE ad nostra castra atque eos qui in opere occupati erant contenderunt."|"adverso COlle: up the hill, i.e. up the hill on which the Roman camp was situated; ablative absolute."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, ALII VADIS rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numquam interdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"alii vadis: while the Helvetii as a body attempt to cross the Rhone by means of bridges of boats, etc., some (alii) try the fords of the river."

"NOT FOUND"|"exspectare: subject of esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"UNIVERSITY OF 10NOTES ***BOOK I, 31Cum his Haeduos ... amisisse. Quibus proeliis ... fractos... im- .perio essent: indirect discourse. Write it out in the direct form."

"dumnorix gratia et largitione APUD SEquanos plurimum poterat et helvetiis erat amicus, quod ex ea civitate orgetorigis filiam in matrimonium duxerat, et cupiditate regni adductus novis rebus studebat et quam plurimas civitates suo beneficio habere obstrictas volebat."|"apud se: in his (Caesar***s) presence."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cum . . . reciperent: a temporal clause; see cum nox . . . fecisset, p. 103,1. 28."

"NOT FOUND"|"finibus: depending on appropinquare. H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III; (H. 386)."

"cum civitas ob EAM REM incitata armis ius suum exsequi conaretur multitudinemque hominum ex agris magistratus cogerent, orgetorix mortuus est;  neque abest suspicio, ut helvetii arbitrantur, quin ipse sibi mortem consciverit."|"15. eam rem consequi: to accomplish this (thing), i.e. to obtain power in this way."

"haedui, cum se suaque AB IIS defendere non possent, legatos ad caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium:  ita se omni tempore de populo romano meritos esse ut paene in conspectu exercitus nostri agri vastari, liberi [eorum] in servitutem abduci, oppida expugnari non debuerint."|"ab iis . . . exploratoribus: this limits cognovit, not abesse; iis belongs to exploratoribus."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 101, line I, Chapter 3. *** Bo: thither, i.e. ad fines Belgarum."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . . . possent: relative clause of characteristic, potential subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 36. *** propinqua ... aequinoctii:	the	(autumnal)	equinoxwas near at hand; Caesar remained in Britain about three weeks."

"nam etsi sine ullo periculo legionis delectae cum equitatu proelium fore videbat, tamen committendum non putabat ut, pulsis hostibus, dici posset eos ab se PER FIDEM in conloquio circumventos."|"2. per fidem: through plighted faith, i.e. by the plighted word of Caesar, who had invited them to this interview; cf. per-fidus, treacherous.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARPosteaquam ... elatum est: when (after) it was reported among the common soldiers. Note the usual mood and tense after Posteaquam."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. uti... reducerent: a substantive clause of purpose, and the cognate object of imperavitOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARsi sibi . . . vellent: if they wished to be blameless in his sight, lit. in relation to him. In the direct discourse the indicative would be used in the condition; sibi, dative of relation. H. 425, 4; LM. 546; A. 235, b\ G. 353; B. 188, 2; (H. 384, 4, N. 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti... uteretur: a substantive clause of purpose, object of impetravit."

"NOT FOUND"|"28. qui: subject of dixerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 47. *** Velle se ... mitteret: Direct discourse:Volo de his rebus quae inter nos agi coeptae neque perfectae sunt agere tecum, uti aut iterum conloquio diem constituas, aut, si id minus vis, ex tuis legatis aliquem ad me mittas."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. pelles ... confectae: skins and thin leather served as sails."

"NOT FOUND"|"denique: at least. What is the more common meaning of the word?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 161, line 2, Chapter 24. *** essedariis: their mode of fighting is described in chapter 33."

"itaque se quod in longiorem diem conlaturus fuisset repraesentaturum et proxima nocte de quarta vigilia castra moturum, ut QUAM PRIMUM intellegere posset utrum apud eos pudor atque officium an timor plus valeret."|"quam primum: see p. 86,1. 31."

"NOT FOUND"|"communit: give the force of com in composition. H. 374, 5; A. 170, a; (H. 344, 5)."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam magnis itineribus contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, CUM HIS quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"cum his congressos: having encountered these, lit. having met with."

"NOT FOUND"|"partes . . . flumen transfluxisse: here flumen depends upon trans, and partes upon duxisse. H. 413; LM. 501; A. 239, 2, b\ G. 331, r. i; B. 179;(H. 376)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ad Helvetios pertinet: leads over to the (country of the) Helvetii. Another illustration of the name of a people used for the name of their country; see Belgae oriuntur, p. 56, 1. 4."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris MATURA NON erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"matura non erant: because it was too early, probably June."

"NOT FOUND"|"miserat: had sent. This must have been after the battle with the Nervii, for the eight legions were all present in that engagement."

"NOT FOUND"|"expulissent: future perfect in the direct discourse; explain mood and tense."

"tandem vulneribus defessi et PEDEM REFERRE et, quod mons suberit circiter mille passuum spatio, eo se recipere coeperunt."|"pedem referre* give the literal meaning and the proper translation."

"SI QUOS adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"Si quos . . . capi posse: indirect discourse. Give the direct."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam magnis itineribus contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, cum his QUINQUE LEGIONIBUS ire contendit."|"quinque legionibus: these five legions with the 10th, which Caesar found in Gaul on his arrival, gave him in all six legions, besides the forces just raised in the province. These six legions were the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, nth, and 12th."

"cum ab his saepius quaereret neque ullam omnino vocem exprimere posset, idem diviacus haeduus respondit:  hoc esse miseriorem et graviorem fortunam sequanorum quam reliquorum, quod soli ne in occulto quidem queri neque auxilium implorare auderent absentisque ariovisti crudelitatem,  VELUT SI coram adesset, horrerent, propterea quod reliquis tamen fugae facultas daretur, sequanis vero, qui intra fines suos ariovistum recepissent, quorum oppida omnia in potestate eius essent, omnes cruciatus essent perferendi."|"velut si... adesset: H. 584; LM. 944; A. 312; G. 602; B. 307; (H. Si3, H)."

"NOT FOUND"|"praecipites ... mandabant: fled precipitately. H. 497; A. 191;325, r. 6; B. 239; (H. 443)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Celeriter ignibus . . . facta: as the alarm was quickly given by fire signals."

"ab eo flumine pari acclivitate collis nascebatur ADVERSUS HUIC et contrarius, passus circiter cc infimus apertus, ab superiore parte silvestris, ut non facile introrsus perspici posset."|"adversus huic et contrarius: opposite to this and on the other side of the river."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, UT ANTE dictum est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"ut ante Cimbri: the incursions of the Cimbri and Teutoni, which took place half a century before, are mentioned by Caesar in Book II, 4 and 29."

"haeduis se obsides redditurum non esse neque his neque eorum sociis iniuria bellum inlaturum, si in eo manerent quod convenisset stipendiumque quotannis penderent; si id non fecissent, LONGE IIS fraternum nomen populi romani afuturum."|"longe iis . . . afuturum: the title of brothers of the Roman people would be far from aiding them."

"NOT FOUND"|"4Chapter 19. *** Quibus rebus cognitis: another instance of the very common use of the relative at the beginning of a sentence or paragraph to indicate a close connection with what precedes. How do you translate quibus ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 75, line I. *** pro vallo: as a breastwork. This use of carts and baggage wagons as a means of defense'"" in battle was common among the Gauls and Germans.	-	."

"cum primis navibus britanniam attigit atque ibi IN OMNIBUS collibus expositas hostium copias armatas conspexit."|"in omnibus collibus: i.e. on the cliffs of Dover."

"NOT FOUND"|"insulam Batavorum: see Map and Vocabulary."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 26.***ut... excitarent: substantive clause of purpose; cognate object of cohortatus."

"NOT FOUND"|"matrem . . . conlocasse: that he had given his mother in marriage to a man among the Bituriges, to a man of the highest birth and power in that tribe (lit. in that place). The Bituriges were neighbors of the Haedui, from whom they were separated by the river Loire."

"HIS DIFFICULTATIBUS duae res erant subsidio, scientia atque usus militum, quod superioribus proeliis exercitati quid fieri oporteret non minus commode ipsi sibi praescribere quam ab aliis doceri poterant, et quod ab opere singulisque legionibus singulos legatos caesar discedere nisi munitis castris vetuerat."|"18. His difficultatibus . . . subsidio: two things proved a relief against these difficulties ; see subsidio oppidanis, p. 104,1. 6."

"haec omnia caesar EODEM ILLO pertinere arbitrabatur ut tridui mora interposita equites eorum qui abessent reverterentur; tamen sese non longius milibus passuum iiii aquationis causa processurum eo die dixit:  huc postero die quam frequentissimi convenirent, ut de eorum postulatis cognosceret."|"eodem illo : adverbs; to that same object, i.e. the same as'{heir otherUNIVERCAESAR***S GALLIC WARproposal, p. 150,1. 16. It is, however, fully explained in the following clause,ut equites ... reverterentur."

"NOT FOUND"|"utrum ... ex usu esset necne: whether it would be of advantage, etc.; a double indirect question; see utrum . . . pudor... an timor, p. 86, 1. 32."

"NOT FOUND"|"pabuli: note the emphatic position between ne and'quidem."

"ipse diviciacum haeduum magnopere cohortatus docet QUANTO OPERE rei publicae communisque salutis intersit manus hostium distineri, ne cum tanta multitudine uno tempore confligendum sit."|"28. quanto opere . . . intersit: how much it concerns the republic and the common safety; an indirect question; quanto Opere, sometimes writtenCAESAR***S GALLIC WARquantopere, is in effect an adverb, but in its origin it is an ablative of difference. The subject of intersit is manus hostium distineri. For the case of rei publicae, see H. 449, 1; LM. 580; A. 222; G. 381; B. 211; (H. 408,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the usual Gallic method of attacking fortified towns?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Hue: construe with convenire."

"ac iam conversis in eam partem navibus quo ventus ferebat, tanta subito MALACIA AC tranquillitas exstitit ut se ex loco movere non possent."|"malacia ac tranquillitas: these two words are probably used only for emphasis, a calm, a dead calm ; malacia is a rare word, borrowed from the Greek."

"GENUS HOC erat pugnae, quo se germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, totidem numero pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, quos ex omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas ut iubis sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"Genus hoc erat pugnae: the following was the method of fighting."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with Caesar***s indirect discourse, and note and explain the changes."

"eorum una pars, quam gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine rhodano, continetur garumna flumine, oceano, finibus belgarum, attingit etiam ab sequanis et helvetiis flumen rhenum, VERGIT AD septentriones."|"2. vergit ad septentriones: is situated toward the north, i.e. it lies to the north of the Roman province. This seems to be the meaning of Caesar***s words as interpreted by him in chapter 16, Gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ante dictum est, posita est."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 43. *** Planities: Caesar was probably at this time in the valley of Upper Alsace, twenty or thirty miles north of Bale."

"horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus confecti procubuissent, SCUTIS INNIXI proelium redintegrarent, calones perterritos hostes conspicati etiam inermes armatis occurrerent,  equites vero, ut turpitudinem fugae virtute delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae se legionariis militibus praeferrent."|"scutis innixi: leaning on their shields. H. 476,3; LM. 629; A. 254, b\401, N. 6; B. 218, 3; (H. 425, 1, N.)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Denique hi sunt idem Germani quibuscum saepenumero Helvetii congressi, non solum in suis, sed etiam in illorum finibus, plerumque superarunt, qui tamen pares esse nostro exercitui non potuerunt."

"hostes impeditos nostri IN FLUMINE adgressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt;  per eorum corpora reliquos audacissime transire conantes multitudine telorum reppulerunt primosque, qui transierant, equitatu circumventos interfecerunt."|"in flumine Ligeri: on the river Loire, the largest river in Gaul, 530 miles long."

"NOT FOUND"|"588, II; LM. 851; A. 321; G. 541; B. 286, I; (H. 516, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this passage with the corresponding passage in Caesar; note and explain differences."

"eo opere perfecto praesidia disponit, castella communit, quo facilius, si SE INVITO transire conentur, prohibere possit."|"se invito: without his consent. Construction ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quae . . . essent. . . possent: indirect questions. H. 649, II; LM. 810; A. 334; G. 467; B. 300; (H. 529,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae: only Celtic Gaul is meant."

"hostes impeditos nostri in flumine adgressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt;  per eorum corpora reliquos audacissime transire conantes multitudine telorum reppulerunt primosque, qui transierant, equitatu CIRCUMVENTOS INTERFECERUNT."|"circumventos interfecerunt: cf. eductas instruxerunt, p. 106, 1. 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"Put the message of Iccius in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"valeat, possint: these verbs would be in the subjunctive in the direct discourse, subjunctive of characteristic; see quibus . . .possent, p. 59, 1. 15."

"NOT FOUND"|"citeriore Gallia = Cisalpina Gallia : i.e. Gaul south of the Alps, esset Caesar . . . demonstravimus: observe that Caesar, in speaking of himself as commander, regularly uses the third person, as esset Caesar; but that in speaking of himself as author he uses the first person, generally plural, as demonstravimus. H. 500, 2; A. 98, 1, b; B. 242, 3; (H. 446, n. 2). ita . . . demonstravimus: see p. 98,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 9. *** post diem tertium: in two days or on the third day, counting both the day of the request and the day of the proposed return."

"namque ipsorum naves ad hunc modum factae armataeque erant: carinae aliquanto planiores quam nostrarum navium, quo facilius vada ac decessum aestus excipere possent;  prorae admodum erectae atque item puppes, ad magnitudinem fluctuum tempestatumque accommodatae;  naves totae factae ex robore ad quamvis vim et contumeliam perferendam;  transtra ex pedalibus in altitudinem trabibus, confixa clavis ferreis digiti pollicis crassitudine;  ancorae pro funibus ferreis catenis revinctae;  pelles pro velis alutaeque tenuiter confectae, [hae] sive propter inopiam lini atque eius usus inscientiam, sive eo, quod est magis veri simile, quod tantas tempestates oceani tantosque impetus ventorum sustineri ac TANTA ONERA navium regi velis non satis commode posse arbitrabantur."|"24. tanta onera, etc.: that such heavy vessels could not be properly man- aged by means of sails."

"qui omnibus rebus subito perterriti et celeritate adventus nostri et DISCESSU SUORUM, neque consilii habendi neque arma capiendi spatio dato perturbantur, copiasne adversus hostem ducere an castra defendere an fuga salutem petere praestaret."|"discessu suorum: by the departure (absence) of their chiefs, detained by Caesar."

"simul eorum qui cum impedimentis veniebant clamor fremitusque oriebatur, ALIIQUE ALIAM in partem perterriti ferebantur."|"aliique aliam ... ferebantur: and some fled (were borne) in terror (terrified) in one direction, others in another ; see aliae alia in parte, p. 115,17."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . imperaverat: observe that ut meaning as is regularly followed by the Indicative, and ut meaning that by the subjunctive."

"haeduis se obsides redditurum non esse neque his neque eorum sociis iniuria bellum inlaturum, si in eo manerent quod convenisset stipendiumque quotannis penderent; SI ID non fecissent, longe iis fraternum nomen populi romani afuturum."|"13. Si id ita .. . non neglecturum: write this sentence in the form which it would take in the direct discourse.Si . .. fecisset. . . futuram: conditional sentence of the first form, with the future perfect in the condition in the direct discourse, and the future in the conclusion; sibi, dative of possessor, refers to Caesar."

"nostri celeriter arma ceperunt eosque IN SILVAS repulerunt et compluribus interfectis longius impeditioribus locis secuti paucos ex suis deperdiderunt."|"in silvas: in the forests. The accusative is used because motion is implied, they fled into the forests and hid themselves."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque IN SUOS habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"in suos: over his countrymen; accusative because of implied motion."

"NOT FOUND"|"9. Hunc... efficit: an encompassing wall makes this (mountain) a stronghold."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne tribueret, despiceret, didicisse, committeret: verbs in the principal clause of the indirect discourse; explain moods. H. 642; LM. 1023; A. 336, 2; G. 650; B. 314; (H. 523)."

"NOT FOUND"|"naves . . . adflictarentur: the ships would be stranded; subjunctive by attraction."

"his rebus celeriter administratis ipse, cum primum per ANNI TEMPUS potuit, ad exercitum contendit."|"anni tempus: it was already late in the season; see p. 158,1. 7."

"qui cupidius novissimum agmen insecuti alieno loco cum equitatu helvetiorum proelium committunt; et PAUCI DE nostris cadunt."|"pauci de nostris: a few of our men."

"NOT FOUND"|"nostris: our ships; dative, depending on adversae."

"dumnorix GRATIA ET largitione apud sequanos plurimum poterat et helvetiis erat amicus, quod ex ea civitate orgetorigis filiam in matrimonium duxerat, et cupiditate regni adductus novis rebus studebat et quam plurimas civitates suo beneficio habere obstrictas volebat."|"6. gratia et largitione: on account of his popularity and generosity."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why is vis changed to velit, and remitte to remittat, in the indirect discourse ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"facta : perfect infinitive, without esse ; subject, ea."

"NOT FOUND"|"pedibus: on foot."

"NOT FOUND"|"19. sectionem *** *** . universam: the whole population of the town, with all their possessions."

"itaque REM SUSCIPIT et a sequanis impetrat ut per fines suos helvetios ire patiantur, obsidesque uti inter sese dent perficit: sequani, ne itinere helvetios prohibeant, helvetii, ut sine maleficio et iniuria transeant."|"rem suscipit: he undertakes the service, i.e. the negotiation in behalf of the Helvetii. Note the meaning of rem here, and of rebus in novis rebus above."

"NOT FOUND"|"de ... consilio: for their conduct the previous season; see iii, 28."

"quod ubi caesar resciit, quorum per fines ierant his uti conquirerent et reducerent, si sibi purgati esse vellent, imperavit; reductos IN HOSTIUM numero habuit;   reliquos omnes obsidibus, armis, perfugis traditis in deditionem accepit."|"in hostium . . . habuit: he treated them as enemies. This seems to be Caesar***s way of saying that he put them all to death."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut possent: so thaty etc.; subjunctive of result. What is the difference between purpose and result? see note on ut . . . suppeteret, p. 57, 1. 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"nullum: observe the emphatic position at the end of the clause."

"veneti reliquaeque item civitates cognito caesaris adventu [certiores facti], simul quod quantum in se facinus admisissent intellegebant, [legatos, quod nomen ad omnes nationes sanctum inviolatumque semper fuisset, retentos ab se et in vincula coniectos,] pro magnitudine periculi bellum parare et maxime ea quae AD USUM navium pertinent providere instituunt, hoc maiore spe quod multum natura loci confidebant."|"ad usum expeditior: more easily managed."

"qui cupidius novissimum agmen insecuti ALIENO LOCO cum equitatu helvetiorum proelium committunt; et pauci de nostris cadunt."|"alieno loco: in an unfavorable place, lit. in a place belonging to another. Suus is used in like manner in the sense of favorable; loco, see locis, p. 59,1. 23."

"his praeerat viridovix ac summam imperii tenebat earum omnium civitatum quae defecerant, ex quibus EXERCITUM [MAGNASQUE copias] coegerat;  atque his paucis diebus aulerci eburovices lexoviique, senatu suo interfecto quod auctores belli esse nolebant, portas clauserunt seque cum viridovice coniunxerunt;  magnaque praeterea multitudo undique ex gallia perditorum hominum latronumque convenerat, quos spes praedandi studiumque bellandi ab agri cultura et cotidiano labore revocabat."|"exercitum magnasque copias: thjs seems to imply that he had not only assembled the regular army (exercitum), but that he had also raised additional forces (magnas copias) by new levies."

"hic primum ortus est a tribunis militum, praefectis, reliquisque qui EX URBE amicitiae causa caesarem secuti non magnum in re militari usum habebant:  quorum alius alia causa inlata, quam sibi ad proficiscendum necessariam esse diceret, petebat ut eius voluntate discedere liceret; non nulli pudore adducti, ut timoris suspicionem vitarent, remanebant."|"ex urbe: from the city, i.e, Rome, the usual meaning when the context does not indicate some other city."

"NOT FOUND"|"21. inre iurando inter se sanxerunt: they mutually bound themselves by oath."

"gallis magno ad pugnam erat impedimento quod pluribus eorum scutis uno ictu pilorum transfixis et conligatis, cum ferrum se inflexisset, neque evellere neque SINISTRA IMPEDITA satis commode pugnare poterant,  multi ut diu iactato bracchio praeoptarent scutum manu emittere et nudo corpore pugnare."|"sinistra impedita: .pe. by the shield attached to it."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum: although."

"cum paulo longius a castris processisset, suos ab hostibus premi atque aegre sustinere et CONFERTA LEGIONE ex omnibus partibus tela coici animadvertit."|"14. conferta legione . . . coici: that as the legion was crowded together. weapons were hurled against it from all sides*Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK IV, 30-36pars unas only one part, i.e. only one place from which grain could be obtained."

"NOT FOUND"|"illam: that part, referring to the Roman province in the south of Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 40.***omnium ordinum: of all ranks. To this council all the centurions were invited, though in an ordinary council of war only those of the first rank (primorum ordinum) were entitled to a place."

"NOT FOUND"|"ubi intellexerunt: what is the regular mood and tense after ubi?"

"ad EAS RES conficiendas biennium sibi satis esse duxerunt; in tertium annum profectionem lege confirmant."|"eas res: those events."

"NOT FOUND"|"citra Rhenum: on this side (i.e. the left or west side) of the Rhine,custodiam *** . . una reliquerant: had left six thousand of their number as a guards and, at the same time, as a defense for them. The duty of the six thousand was twofold, *** to guard the property and to hold the place."

"NOT FOUND"|"missa ab Gallis, etc.: those hurled by the Gauls fell with greater force."

"NOT FOUND"|"si . . . statuisset: if he should decide; future perfect in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Amicitiam ... appetierit: Direct discourse:Amicitiam populi Romani mihi ornamento et praesidio, non detrimento esse oportet, atque hac spe petii. Si per populum Romanum stipendium remittetur et dediticii subtrahentur, non minus libenter recusabo populi Romani amicitiam quam appetii."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . proficiscantur: object clause. On what does it depend? Cf. ut . . . exirent, p. 57,1. 4, and ut . . . occuparet, p. 58, 1. 6."

"instructo exercitu magis ut loci natura [deiectusque collis] et necessitas temporis quam ut rei militaris RATIO ATQUE ordo postulabat, cum diversae legiones aliae alia in parte hostibus resisterent saepibusque densissimis, ut ante demonstravimus, interiectis prospectus impediretur, neque certa subsidia conlocari neque quid in quaque parte opus esset provideri neque ab uno omnia imperia administrari poterant."|"ratio atque usus belli: the theory and practice of war."

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam tanto suo populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu APPELLATUS ESSET, hanc sibi populoque romano gratiam referret ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, haec esse quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret ut quos illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"appellatus esset: why subjunctive? see quod sit destitutus, p. 67,1. 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"gaesa: the gaesum was a heavy Gallic javelin used especially by Alpine Gauls."

"DEBERE SE suspicari simulata caesarem amicitia, quod exercitum in gallia habeat, sui opprimendi causa habere."|"30. Debere se suspicari, etc.: that he had reason to suspect that Caesar under the pretense of friendship kept the army which he had in Gaul for the purpose of crushing him, i.e. Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"recuperaturos : future infinitive without esse, as usual."

"NOT FOUND"|"cursu: ablative of cause, with exanimatos."

"NOT FOUND"|"hanc Galliam: this part of Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 16.***quarum: construe with iustissima."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Chapter 4.***vix ut: notice the emphatic position of vix."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui... antecessissent: indirect clause."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this direct form with Caesar***s indirect discourse. By this method, it is hoped, you may most easily overcome the difficulties of the indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"occupavissent: represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit ut non mediocriter omnium MENTES ANIMOSQUE perturbaret."|"mentes animosque: minds and spirits. Mens is the mind, intellect, the reasoning faculty; animus, the soul, spirit, the mind or soul as the seat of the emotions."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. sibi temperaturos quin in provinciam exirent: would refrain from invading the province, lit. would restrain themselves by which they should not go forth into the province. H. 595; LM. 913; A. 319, d; G. 555; B. 284, 3; (H. 504)."

"atque in alteram item cohortandi causa profectus PUGNANTIBUS OCCURRIT."|"pugnantibus occurrit: he found them (i.e. his men) fighting."

"NOT FOUND"|"Bruto, tribunis militum, etc.: as Caesar had no organized navy, his fleet was manned by soldiers and commanded by military officers."

"NOT FOUND"|"tantus . . . timor: here begins the independent or leading clause of the sentence. Timor is an unreasonable fear, timidity; metus, a reasonable, well-founded fear."

"cum se illi identidem in silvis ad suos reciperent ac rursus ex silva in nostros impetum facerent, neque nostri longius quam quem ad finem porrecta [ac] loca aperta pertinebant cedentes insequi auderent, interim legiones vi quae primae venerant, OPERE DIMENSO, castra munire coeperunt."|"opere dimenso: having measured off the ground, i.e. the ground which the camp or work was to occupy."

"NOT FOUND"|"timeret: potential subjunctive in a relative <4ause."

"NOT FOUND"|"milium . . . circuitu: by a circuit of more than fifty miles ; milium, for milium passuum. Where was Caesar at this time? see p. 84, 1. 13. Ariovistus, whom Caesar wished to meet, was in the valley of the Rhine. The direct route would lead over the northern part of the Jura chain, but Caesar preferred a circuitous route through the open country."

"NOT FOUND"|"posse: that they (the Romans) could,nostros a novissimo agmine: our men on the rear; see note on ab Sequanis, p. 56, 1. 1. For the arrangement of an army on the march, see 68-72."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne ... adduceretur: object clause depending on vererentur. H. 567; LM. 897; A. 331,/; G. 550; B. 296, 2; (H. 498, III)."

"NOT FOUND"|"nuptum: lit. to veil one***s sejff, as the bride for the bridegroom. Hence in the sense of to marry it is applicable only to the bride, while duco is used of the bridegroom who leads his bride home. On the construction of the supine nuptum, see note on rogatum, p. 63, 1. 12."

"NOT FOUND"|"32. aperto . .. constituit: he anchored off an open and level shore, probably not far from Deal. H. 485, 2; LM. 626; A. 258,/; G. 385, N. 1; B. 228, b; (H. 425, II, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"litteris Graecis confectae: written (made) in Greek characters. These Greek letters were undoubtedly derived from the Greek colony at Marseilles, in Southern Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . .. ferebat: this refers to the chief centurion, who bore the eagle, the standard of the legion; see 102."

"NOT FOUND"|"repetisset: the subject, if expressed, would be a pronoun referring to Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"Sabim flumen: see Vocabulary. The rest of the chapter, indirect, depends on inveniebat. Direct:Sabis flumen a castris non amplius milia passuum X abest; trans id flumen omnes Nervii consederunt adventumque Romanorum exspectant una cum Atrebatibus et Viromanduis, finitimis suis, *** nam his utrisque persuaserunt uti eandem belli fortunam experirentur***; exspectantur etiam ab iis Aduatucorum copiae atque sunt in itinere; mulieres quique per aetatem ad pugnamGoogleNOTES*** BOOK II, 15-17inutiles videbantur in eum locum coni'ecerunt, quo propter paludes exercitui aditus non esset."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. remigrare in agros: to return to their fields, i.e. to their homes and their usual occupations, as the war was over."

"helvetii cum omnibus suis carris secuti impedimenta in unum locum contulerunt; ipsi confertissima acie, reiecto nostro equitatu, PHALANGE FACTA sub primam nostram aciem successerunt."|"21. phalange facta: see note on phalange, p. 72,1. 26."

"eo opere perfecto praesidia disponit, castella communit, QUO FACILIUS, si se invito transire conentur, prohibere possit."|"quo facilius... posset: clause of purpose with a comparative. H. 568, 7; LM. 908; A. 317, b; G. 545, 2; B. 282; (H. 497, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Have you found in this chapter any construction or idiom with which you were not already familiar?"

"NOT FOUND"|"What report did the cavalry of the Treveri carry home ? What was the ground for that report?"

"NOT FOUND"|"10. Chapter 15. *** equitatumque omnem: Caesar***s cavalry in Gaul was composed chiefly of Gauls, but it contained a few Germans and Spaniards."

"NOT FOUND"|"Remos . . . adeat . . . contineat Germanosque prohibeat: object clause of purpose, object of mandat; imperative in the direct form."

"perfacile factu esse ILLIS PROBAT conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  non esse dubium quin totius galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"illis probat: he attempts to show them (to them). To whom does illis refer? probat: H. 530; A. 276, b\ G. 227, n. 2; B. 259, 2; (H. 467, 6)."

"horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus confecti procubuissent, scutis innixi proelium redintegrarent, calones perterritos hostes conspicati ETIAM INERMES armatis occurrerent,  equites vero, ut turpitudinem fugae virtute delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae se legionariis militibus praeferrent."|"etiam inermes armatis occurrerent: even though unarmed encountered armed foes."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. imperasset: future perfect in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesari: what kind of a dative? By what case should such datives be rendered?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . viderentur: explain mood."

"nostri, simul in arido constiterunt, suis omnibus consecutis, in hostes impetum fecerunt atque eos in fugam dederunt; neque longius prosequi potuerunt, QUOD EQUITES cursum tenere atque insulam capere non potuerant."|"quod equites: they were still detained by adverse winds at the upper harbor; see p. 160, 1. 16, and p. 163,11. n-13."

"PERFACILE FACTU esse illis probat conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  non esse dubium quin totius galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"Perfacile factu esse, etc.: he shows them (to them) that it is very easy to accomplish their designs, lit. to accomplish their designs is very easy to do {factu); see note on perfacile esse, etc., p. 57, 1. 5. H** 635; LM. 1007; A. 303; G. 436; B. 340, 2; (H. 547)."

"ipse eo PEDESTRIBUS COPIIS contendit."|"pedestribus copiis : see omnibus copiis, p. 123,1. 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"comparare: the infinitives comparare, coemere, etc., all depend on/\Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARconstituerunt. What other construction does constituo admit? H. 565,5; LM. 894) A. 331, d\ G. 546, N. 3? B* 295** 4** (H* 49^** i> N.)**quam maximum: as large as possible. H. 159, 2; LM. 679; A. 93, b; G. 303; B. 240, 3; (H. 170, 2)."

"perfacile factu esse illis probat conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  NON ESSE dubium quin totius galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"Non esse fas: that it was not right or not the divine will. Compare the question with the answer: utrum ... ex USU esset, whether it would be of advantage ; Non esse fas, that it was not the divine will."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae totius ... numerum: Direct discourse:Galliae totius factiones sunt duae; harum alterius principatum tenent Haedui, alterius Arverni. Hi cum tantopere de potentatu inter se multos annos contenderent, factum est uti ab Arvernis Sequanisque Germani mercede arcesserentur. Horum primo circiter milia xv Rhenum transierunt; posteaquam agros et cultum et copias Gallorum homines feri ac barbari adamarunt, traducti sunt plures; nunc sunt in Gallia ad centum et viginti milium numerum."

"NOT FOUND"|"principatum: note the difference in meaning between regnum, the kingly power and authority exercised by a recognized ruler, and principatus, the prominent position and influence of a leader. Dumnorix already holds the principatus among his people, and he is now urged to seize the regnum."

"ipse, CUM PRIMUM pabuli copia esse inciperet, ad exercitum venit."|"cum primum .. . potuit: as early as the season permitted, probably inMay,Page 131, line 1. *** in se admisissent: had committed,2. legatos retentos . . . coniectos: this clause explains facinus, but depends upon intellegebant; but the term legatos, ambassadors, envoys, seems hardly applicable to Silius and Velanius; see chapters 7 and 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. alio consilio, aliis occurrisse rebus : with one purpose, but had encountered far other results. The contrast here is between the purpose and the result. The purpose was to open communication with Italy by way of the Alps; the result was disappointment and failure."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 119, line 1. *** qui superessent: the survivorsy lit. who survived."

"quin etiam, quod NECESSARIAM REM coactus caesari enuntiarit, intellegere sese quanto id cum periculo fecerit, et ob eam causam quam diu potuerit tacuisse."|"necessariam rem: a fact that needed to be disclosed."

"QUOD SI veteris contumeliae oblivisci vellet, num etiam recentium iniuriarum, quod eo invito iter per provinciam per vim temptassent, quod haeduos, quod ambarros, quod allobrogas vexassent, memoriam deponere posse?"|"Quod si vellet: but if he were willing. H. 510, 9; A. 240, b\ G. 610, 2; B. 185, 2; (H. 453, 6)."

"NOT FOUND"|"475; LM. 612; A. 245; G. 408; B. 219; (H. 416)."

"cum illi orbe facto sese defenderent, celeriter ad clamorem hominum circiter milia vi convenerunt; qua re nuntiata, caesar omnem ex castris EQUITATUM SUIS auxilio misit."|"equitatum suis auxilio: explain cases."

"NOT FOUND"|"transportaret: in the same construction as ferret above."

"ubi per exploratores caesar certior factus est tres iam partes copiarum helvetios id flumen traduxisse, quartam vero partem citra flumen ararim reliquam esse, DE TERTIA vigilia cum legionibus tribus e castris profectus ad eam partem pervenit quae nondum flumen transierat."|"de tertia vigilia: in the third watch, lit. from or out of; de implies that the third watch had begun, but not necessarily that much of it had passed. It began at midnight."

"itaque PRIUS QUAM quicquam conaretur, diviciacum ad se vocari iubet et, cotidianis interpretibus remotis, per c. valerium troucillum, principem galliae provinciae, familiarem suum, cui summam omnium rerum fidem habebat, cum eo conloquitur;  simul commonefacit quae ipso praesente in concilio [gallorum] de dumnorige sint dicta, et ostendit quae separatim quisque de eo apud se dixerit."|"prius quam . . . conaretur: H. 605, II; LM. 880; A. 327; G. 577; B. 292; (H. 520, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"appellabatur septima: was called the seventh, i.e. septima was the name of the legion. The legions were numbered as they were raised, and were afterward known by the numbers then assigned to them. Caesar had under his command in all eight legions, two in Britain, the seventh and tenth, and six in Gaul, the eighth, ninth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth."

"NOT FOUND"|"ilium: referring to Ariovistus; it is the subject of consecutum (esse)."

"NOT FOUND"|"His, eorum: these pronouns refer to the Menapii who had returned to their homes."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 87, line 1. *** decima legione: this was Caesar***s favorite legion, so famous for discipline and courage."

"ipse, cum primum pabuli copia esse inciperet, AD EXERCITUM venit."|"ad exercitum : to the army, which was at the time in winter quarters; see p. 144,1. 24. He himself probably spent the winter, in accordance with his usual custom, in Northern Italy or Cisalpine Gaul."

"QUOD SUA victoria tam insolenter gloriarentur quodque tam diu se impune iniurias tulisse admirarentur, eodem pertinere."|"quod sua voluntate . . . pependerint: which they had paid of their own free will. Note the difference between this statement and that given by Diviciacus, p. 78,1L 21-28."

"NOT FOUND"|"quae . .. iactis, etc.: and yet having cast anchor, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"materiam conversam ad hostem: trees (timber) with their boughs toward ihe enemy."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. alii : indirect object after ferret."

"NOT FOUND"|"citeriorem Galliam: also called Gallia Cisalpina, consisting of Gaul south of the Alps."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 96, line 1. *** pro: note the force of pro in pro castris and pro hostium numero. Name one other common meaning of pro."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. Remi: the Remi remained the faithful allies of Caesar throughout the war."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque EO GRAVIUS ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  qui si alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed eo deceptum, quod neque commissum a se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"eo gravius vindicandum, quo: that punishment should be inflicted with greater severity in order that, lit. on this account that."

"NOT FOUND"|"saepibus ... interiectis: see teneris arboribus ... interiectis, with note, p. hi, 1. 24."

"ob easque res EX LITTERIS caesaris dierum xv supplicatio decreta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nulli."|"ex litteris Caesaris : in consequence of Caesar***s dispatches."

"eodem tempore [quo haedui] ambarri, NECESSARII ET consanguinei haeduorum, caesarem certiorem faciunt sese depopulatis agris non facile ab oppidis vim hostium prohibere."|"necessarii et consanguinei: friends and relatives; necessarii is a more comprehensive term than amici, and includes, not only those who are bound together by the ties of friendship, but also those who are connected in business or in official relations."

"NOT FOUND"|"Boios: object of conlocarent; note the emphatic position."

"NOT FOUND"|"25. Chapter 10.***Erant . . . hae quas: were these which,. Note the position of Erant hae difficultates, pointing back to the preceding chapter; there were difficulties, and they were these, etc."

"de numero eorum OMNIA SE habere explorata remi dicebant, propterea quod propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti quantam quisque multitudinem in communi belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit cognoverint."|"omnia se habere explorata: that they had ascertained everything; explorata agrees with omnia. H. 431, 3; LM. 1018; A. 292, c; G. 238; B. 337, 6; (H. 388, 1. N.)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARuti . . . satisfacerent: to excuse them to Caesar; an object clause, depending on egerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 135, line 2. *** copulis: in naval engagements, the Romans often used grappling irons, by which they seized and held the enemy***s ships."

"de numero eorum omnia se habere explorata remi dicebant, propterea quod propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti quantam quisque multitudinem in communi belgarum concilio ad ID BELLUM pollicitus sit cognoverint."|"id bellum: that war, i.e. against the Morini and Menapii."

"NOT FOUND"|"14. Chapter 30.***primo adventu: ablative of time."

"nostri primo integris viribus fortiter propugnare neque ullum flustra telum ex loco superiore mittere, et quaecumque pars castrorum nudata defensoribus premi videbatur, eo occurrere et auxilium ferre,  sed hoc superari quod diuturnitate pugnae hostes defessi proelio excedebant, ALII INTEGRIS viribus succedebant;  quarum rerum a nostris propter paucitatem fieri nihil poterat, ac non modo defesso ex pugna excedendi, sed ne saucio quidem eius loci ubi constiterat relinquendi ac sui recipiendi facultas dabatur."|"alii integris viribus: others with unimpaired strength."

"NOT FOUND"|"Arvernis Sequanisque: the Arverni and the Sequani were united in their opposition to their common rival, the Haedui."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum: whenever."

"NOT FOUND"|"reliquis . .. daretur: to the rest an opportunity for flight was nevertheless offered."

"caesar, obsidibus acceptis primis civitatis atque ipsius galbae regis duobus filiis ARMISQUE OMNIBUS ex oppido traditis, in deditionem suessiones accipit exercitumque in bellovacos ducit."|"armisque omnibus traditis: captured towns were generally thus disarmed."

"hi neque vultum fingere NEQUE INterdum lacrimas tenere poterant: abditi in tabernaculis aut suum fatum querebantur aut cum familiaribus suis commune periculum miserabantur."|"neque in provinciam redegisset: Caesar evidently cites this as an illustration of generosity on the part of Rome, but policy, as well as generosity, probably dictated the course adopted by the Romans on this occasion, as the Averni and the Ruteni dwelt beyond the Cevennes, and could not, therefore, be readily incorporated in the Roman province."

"his nuntiis acceptis galba, cum neque opus hibernorum munitionesque plene ESSENT PERFECTAE neque de frumento reliquoque commeatu satis esset provisum quod deditione facta obsidibusque acceptis nihil de bello timendum existimaverat, consilio celeriter convocato sententias exquirere coepit."|"essent perfectae: agreeing with munitiones, though the subject is opus munitionesque; see captus est\ with note; p. 75,1. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"Suebos . .. constituisse: indirect discourse, in apposition with haec. Write it in the direct form and note changes."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... vectigales: causal clause explaining the great influence of the Veneti. Why are the verbs in the indicative? Notice the main facts contained in this causal clause. The Veneti have ships and know how to use them; they have frequent communication with Britain, thereby controlling the trade between that island and the mainland; they control all the harbors on that coast, and are thus enabled to collect tolls from all those who make use of those harbors."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAsummi laboris: predicate genitive; see also erat . . . pedum . . . trium, p. 112, 1. 9. H. 447 ; LM. 556; G. 366; B. 203, 5; (H. 402)."

"NOT FOUND"|"reductos: when they were brought back, referring to those who had fled; the object of habuit."

"is m. messala, [et p.] m. pisone consulibus regni cupiditate inductus coniurationem nobilitatis fecit et civitati persuasit ut de finibus suis CUM OMNIBUS copiis exirent:  perfacile esse, cum virtute omnibus praestarent, totius galliae imperio potiri."|"cum omnibus suis domo excesserant: thus Caesar admits that the Germans were seeking new homes for themselves and their families."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 19. *** si . . . premerentur: indirect clause, depending on pollicitus, having promised that he would give them, etc., if they should, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"4* virtute: ablative of cause; see memoria, p. 101,1. 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"pedum sescentorum: predicate genitive of characteristic; see erat . . . milium, p. 76,1. 25; amplius has no effect on the case. The actual distanceNOTES ***BOOK I, 37-39is found to be sixteen hundred Roman feet. The character for thousand may have been accidentally omitted by copyists."

"nam hoc TOTO PROELIO, cum ab hora septima ad vesperum pugnatum sit, aversum hostem videre nemo potuit."|"toto proelio: ablative of time."

"si [id] ita fecisset, sibi populoque romano perpetuam gratiam atque amicitiam cum eo futuram; SI NON impetraret, sese, quoniam m. messala, m. pisone consulibus senatus censuisset uti quicumque galliam provinciam obtineret, quod commodo rei publicae facere posset, haeduos ceterosque amicos populi romani defenderet, se haeduorum iniurias non neglecturum."|"si non impetraret, sese ... se... non neglecturum: note that impetraret and neglecturum both represent the future indicative of the direct discourse; sese, repeated in the form of se after the long parenthesis, quoniam . .. defenderet, is the subject of the infinitive neglecturum."

"NOT FOUND"|"auderet: subjunctive of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . insisterent atque . . . pugnarent . . . coicerent et . . . remitterent: result clauses with ut expressed only with the first verb."

"NOT FOUND"|"In accordance with general custom, Caesar pitched his camp in the rear of his army, and proceeded at once to fortify it. The Helvetii had deposited their baggage at a convenient distance in the rear, and had placed their wagons in a circle around it *** a common defense for a Gallic camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"War with the Belgae, I-33Page 99, line 1, Chapter i. *** Cum esset: remember that after cum the imperfect and pluperfect tenses are usually in the subjunctive. H. 600, II; LM. 858; A. 325; G. 585; B. 288; (H. 521, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"iumentis: construe with utuntur."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. frumentatum: see note on gratulatum, p. 77,1. 6."

"QUI SUUM timorem in rei frumentariae simulationem angustiasque itineris conferrent, facere arroganter, cum aut de officio imperatoris desperare aut praescribere viderentur."|"16. Qui suum . . . iudicaturos: Direct discourse rQui suum timorem in rei frumentariae simulationem angustiasque itineris conferunt, faciunt arroganter, cum aut de officio imperatoris desperare aut praescribere videantur. Haec mihi sunt curae; frumentum Sequani, Leuci, Lingones subministrant, iamque sunt in agris frumenta matura; de itinere ipsi brevi tempore iudicabitis."

"collis ab summo aequaliter declivis ad flumen sabim, QUOD SUPRA nominavimus, vergebat."|"quod supra ... nominavimus: p. no, L 22. vergebat: descriptive imperfect."

"NOT FOUND"|"obsides . .. curasset: he had caused hostages to be exchanged between them, i.e. between the Helvetii and the Sequani."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 162, line 1. *** cohortati inter se: exhorting one another."

"illi alias eruptione temptata, alias cuniculis ad aggerem vineasque actis (cuius rei sunt longe peritissimi aquitani, propterea quod multis locis apud eos aerariae secturaeque sunt), ubi diligentia nostrorum NIHIL HIS rebus profici posse intellexerunt, legatos ad crassum mittunt seque in deditionem ut recipiat petunt."|"nihil his committendum: that no confidence should be reposed in them."

"NOT FOUND"|"sese . . . repetituros: infinitive clause, depending on iure iurando ... obstringere."

"NOT FOUND"|"10. pedum trium: predicate genitive. H. 439; LM. 558; A. 215, b; G. 366; B. 203, 2 and 5; (H. 401)."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ... COicerent: when they would charge down, etc.; temporal clause, with the future indicative in the direct discourse; explain mood and tense."

"germani post tergum clamore audito, cum suos interfici viderent, armis abiectis signis militaribus relictis se ex castris eiecerunt,  et cum AD CONFLUENTEM mosae et rheni pervenissent, reliqua fuga desperata, magno numero interfecto, reliqui se in flumen praecipitaverunt atque ibi timore, lassitudine, vi fluminis oppressi perierunt."|"ad confluentem ... Rheni: this probably refers to the confluence of the Meuse with the left branch of the Rhine, also called the Waal; see p. 150, 11. 19, 20."

"caesarem vel auctoritate sua ATQUE EXERCITUS vel recenti victoria vel nomine populi romani deterrere posse ne maior multitudo germanorum rhenum traducatur, galliamque omnem ab ariovisti iniuria posse defendere."|"atque exercitus: and that of the army."

"NOT FOUND"|"9. Chapter 17.***tutum esse . . . dignitatis esse: tutum is predicate adjective with esse, and dignitatis predicate genitive with esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"ibi: i.e. in Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"equitatu: why not ab equitatu? H. 468, 2; LM. 645; A. 248, c;401, R. i; B. 218, 10; (H.415,1, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Caesarem certiorem faciunt sese . . . prohibere: inform Caesar (make Caesar more certain) that they, etc. Observe that the expression certiorem facere not only takes the accusative of the person informed but also an infinitive clause. With the passive construction the infinitive clause is retained; thus: Caesar certior fit eos . . . prohibere. H. 613, 3; LM. 961; A. 272; G. 527, r. 2; B. 331, 1; (H. 535, 3)."

"non sese gallis sed gallos sibi bellum intulisse: omnes galliae civitates ad se oppugnandum venisse ac CONTRA SE castra habuisse; eas omnes copias a se uno proelio pulsas ac superatas esse."|"3. contra se castra habuisse: had encamped against him."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 150, line 1, Chapter 8. *** quae : object of respondere, to be supplied from respondit."

"NOT FOUND"|"conantes : belonging to reliquos."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. nihil reliqui fecerunt: made all possible haste, or, more literally, left nothing undone to secure speed\	H. 447, i; LM. 556; A. 216, a, i; G. 369,R. 2; (H. 401, N. 4)."

"NOT FOUND"|"fratres: predicate accusative with appellatos, who had been called brothers. H. 393** 9J LM. 475; A. 185; G. 321; B. 169, 2; (H. 363)."

"NOT FOUND"|"How did Ariovistus arrange his forces?"

"NOT FOUND"|"duobus bellis: i.e. the war with the Helvetii, and that with Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne ... admitteretur: object clause of purpose; it is practically the cognate object of cohortati, giving the substance of the appeal."

"postulavit deinde eadem quae legatis IN MANDATIS dederat: ne aut haeduis aut eorum sociis bellum inferret, obsides redderet, si nullam partem germanorum domum remittere posset, at ne quos amplius rhenum transire pateretur."|"19. in mandatis: in his instructions; see p. 82,11.1-12."

"ubii autem, qui uni ex transrhenanis ad caesarem legatos miserant, amicitiam fecerant, obsides dederant, magnopere orabant ut sibi auxilium ferret, quod graviter ab suebis premerentur;  vel, si id facere OCCUPATIONIBUS REI publicae prohiberetur, exercitum modo rhenum transportaret: id sibi ad auxilium spemque reliqui temporis satis futurum."|"26. occupationibus rei publicae: by his public duties."

"NOT FOUND"|"pace: ablative of means; special use; see frumento . . . uti, p. 67,1. 4."

"NOT FOUND"|"Coniurandi: of the conspiracy or confederacy. In Caesar***s view any agreement made by the Gauls for their protection against the Romans was a conspiracy."

"his rebus cognitis caesar gallorum animos verbis confirmavit pollicitusque est sibi eam rem curae futuram; magnam se habere spem et BENEFICIO SUO et auctoritate adductum ariovistum finem iniuriis facturum."|"beneficio suo: by the service which he (Caesar) had rendered him, lit. by his service, referring to the fact that in the consulship of Caesar, the year before, Ariovistus had received from the Roman senate the title of king and friend; see p. 82,1. 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . demigrarent: clause of purpose; imperative in the direct form."

"hac audita pugna maxima pars aquitaniae sese crasso dedidit obsidesque ultro misit; quo in numero fuerunt tarbelli, bigerriones, ptianii, vocates, tarusates, elusates, gates, ausci, garumni, sibusates, cocosates:  paucae ultimae nationes ANNI TEMPORE confisae, quod hiems suberat, id facere neglexerunt."|"anni tempore confisae: confido usually takes the ablative when used of things, but the dative when used of persons."

"omni ora maritima celeriter ad suam sententiam perducta communem legationem ad p. crassum mittunt, SI VELIT suos recuperare, obsides sibi remittat."|"20. si velit . . . remittat: indirect discourse, depending on legationem mittunt. Direct:Si vis tuos recipere, obsides nobis remitte."

"AD MULTAM noctem etiam ad impedimenta pugnatum est, propterea quod pro vallo carros obiecerunt et e loco superiore in nostros venientes tela coniciebant et non nulli inter carros rotasque mataras ac tragulas subiciebant nostrosque vulnerabant."|"ad multam noctem: till late at night; see note on multo die, p. 71, L 25."

"NOT FOUND"|"' Caesari . . . dandum: this sentence gives a list of the chief duties of a Roman commander on the eve of battle. Here notice that the several things to be done are all expressed by the periphrastic conjugation, and that the verb, esse, is expressed only with the first, erant agenda."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 10.***ex monte Vosego: from the Vosges. Caesar seems not to be entirely accurate here, as the Meuse has its source in the plateau of Langres."

"rostro enim noceri non posse cognoverant; turribus autem excitatis tamen has altitudo puppium EX BARBARIS navibus superabat, ut neque ex inferiore loco satis commode tela adigi possent et missa a gallis gravius acciderent."|"ex barbaris navibus: of or on the barbarian skips. For this idiomatic use of ex, see ex muro, on the wall, p. 120,1. 19; ex itinere, on the march, p. 103,1. 18."

"OB EASQUE res ex litteris caesaris dierum xv supplicatio decreta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nulli."|"ob easque res: H. 677, 2; (H. 569, III, 4)."

"populi romani hanc esse consuetudinem, ut socios atque amicos non modo sui nihil deperdere, sed gratia, dignitate, HONORE AUCTIORES velit esse; quod vero ad amicitiam populi romani attulissent, id iis eripi quis pati posset?"|"honore auctiores esse: to be advanced in honor."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, NON NUMQUAM interdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"non numquam: effect of the two negatives ? What would numquam non mean ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... preberent: substantive clause of purpose, object of effecerant instar muri: like a wall. H. 446, 4; A. 223, e; G. 373; B. 198, 2;(H. 398, 4)."

"NOT FOUND"|"proelio abstinebat: with this verb the ablative of separation may be used either with or without a preposition."

"NOT FOUND"|"UNIVERSITY OF l(CAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 154, 156voluit, cum intellegerent: the connection between these clauses is this: he wished them to fear, etc., as they surely would fear, when they under- stood, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. hospitio Ariovisti utebatur: note with what care in this case CaesarOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK I, 46-49selects his envoys. The bond of hospitium had such sanctity in ancient times that it was hoped that even Ariovistus would not dare to violate it."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numquam interdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, OPERIS MUNITIONE et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"operis munitione: referring to the wall, redoubts, etc., mentioned above."

"NOT FOUND"|"31. sublicae ... oblique agebantur: strong piles (sublicae) are driven obliquely into the bed of the river below the bridge, as a further support against the force of the stream. These are connected with the main timbers of the trestle work, as seen in the plan in the text."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 132, line 4. *** priusquam . . . conspirarent: see priusquam ... reciperent, p. 108,1. 16."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... erant cogniti: Caesar evidently thinks that the Haedui wish to secure the aid of the Boii against their old rivals, the Sequani."

"NOT FOUND"|"populum: construction? H. 613, 6; (H. 535,1, 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"impedimentis: as here used this must include not only ordinary bag* gage, but also live stock."

"NOT FOUND"|"amplius: is the neuter comparative of amplus, and is the subject of interesset. H. 495; LM. 487; A. 188; G. 204, n. 2; B. 237; (H. 441)."

"SEPTIMO DIE, cum iter non intermitteret, ab exploratoribus certior factus est ariovisti copias a nostris milia passuum iiii et xx abesse."|"Septimo die: we must not suppose that Caesar marched only fifty miles in these seven days. The circuit of fifty miles brought him around the mountains into the direct road, but it formed only a part of the distance."

"qui se ex his minus timidos existimari volebant, non se hostem vereri, sed angustias itineris et magnitudinem silvarum QUAE INTERCEDERENT inter ipsos atque ariovistum, aut rem frumentariam, ut satis commode supportari posset, timere dicebant."|"6. quae intercederent: explain subjunctive.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARrem frumentariam, ut, etc.: that grain might not be furnished with sufficient readiness, lit. that they feared the grain, that it might not be furnished with sufficient readiness. H. 567;' LM. 897; A. 331 f; G. 550; B. 296, 2; (H. 498, III)."

"atque in eam se consuetudinem adduxerunt ut LOCIS FRIGIDISSIMIS neque vestitus praeter pelles habeant quicquam, quarum propter exiguitatem magna est corporis pars aperta, et laventur in fluminibus."|"locis frigidissimis : though their country is exceedingly cold; ablative absolute."

"cum civitas ob EAM REM incitata armis ius suum exsequi conaretur multitudinemque hominum ex agris magistratus cogerent, orgetorix mortuus est;  neque abest suspicio, ut helvetii arbitrantur, quin ipse sibi mortem consciverit."|"eam rem accidisse: this had happened\ an infinitive clause depending on intellegere."

"vulgo TOTIS CASTRIS testamenta obsignabantur."|"31. totis castris: remember that the ablative with lotus is regularly used without a preposition. H. 485, 2; LM. 626; A. 258,/; G. 388; B. 228 b; V.H. 425** 2)#Page 85, line 4. *** Qui se ex his, etc.: of these whoever wished, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. quod: give the antecedent. H. 399, 6; LM. 830; A. 200, et N.; G. 614, r. 2; B. 247, 1, b; (H. 445, 7)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut *** . *** postularent: as military science and especially the art of navigation require. Note the tense. H. 549; A. 287, d; (H. 495, V)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Eorum: probably depends upon censu, though some editors make it depend upon numerus, and treat milium as a predicate genitive."

"ubi eum castris se tenere caesar intellexit, ne diutius commeatu prohiberetur, ultra eum locum, QUO IN loco germani consederant, circiter passus dc ab his, castris idoneum locum delegit acieque triplici instructa ad eum locum venit."|"Quo in consilio: note this common use of the Latin relative."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by GOOglCCAESAR***S GALLIC WARisdem ducibus usus: employing as guides the same men ; isdem depends on usus; see eodem iure, p. 101,1. 13; ducibus is a predicate noun, agreeing with isdem, used substantively. H. 393, 9; LM. 475; A. 185; G. 321; B. 169, 2; (H. 362, 3)."

"is m. messala, [et p.] m. pisone consulibus regni cupiditate inductus coniurationem nobilitatis fecit et civitati persuasit ut de finibus suis cum OMNIBUS COPIIS exirent:  perfacile esse, cum virtute omnibus praestarent, totius galliae imperio potiri."|"omnibus copiis: H. 474, 2, n. 1; LM. 634; A. 248, a, n.; G. 392, R. i; B. 222, i; (H. 419, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. in Menapios: construe with ducendum."

"celeriter, ut ante caesar imperaverat, ignibus significatione facta, EX PROXIMIS castellis eo concursum est,  pugnatumque ab hostibus ita acriter est ut a viris fortibus in extrema spe salutis iniquo loco contra eos qui ex vallo turribusque tela iacerent pugnari debuit, cum in una virtute omnis spes consisteret."|"2. ex proximis navibus: i.e. on the nearest ships."

"NOT FOUND"|"receptos . . . adsciscunt: they receive and ally to themselves as confederates. H. 639; A. 292, r.; G. 664, r. T; B. 337, 2; (H. 549, 5)."

"ad haec caesar quae visum est respondit; sed exitus fuit orationis: sibi nullam cum iis amicitiam esse posse, si in gallia remanerent;  neque verum esse, qui suos fines tueri non potuerint alienos occupare; neque ullos in gallia vacare agros qui dari tantae praesertim multitudini sine iniuria possint;  sed licere, si velint, in ubiorum finibus considere, quorum sint legati apud se et de sueborum iniuriis querantur et a se auxilium petant: hoc se ubIIS IMPERATurus."|"iis imperat: demands of them, lit. levies or imposes upon them, with direct and indirect object, numerum, iis."

"plurimum inter eos bellovacos et virtute et auctoritate et hominum numero valere: hos posse conficere armata milia centum, pollicitos ex eo numero ELECTA MILIA lx totiusque belli imperium sibi postulare."|"electa milia sexaginta: sixty thousand picked men."

"NOT FOUND"|"duplici muro: with a double wall% i.e. with two walls, one within theother. In front of the outer wall they had also dug a trench; see p. 122, 1. 21."

"NOT FOUND"|"proelii . .. signum dedit: see signum dandum, p. 114, 1. 16."

"NOT FOUND"|"bello Cassiano: in their war with Cassius. Adjectives are often thus equivalent to an oblique case (generally a genitive) of the noun from which they are derived. H. 437; LM. 554; A. 214, a, 2; G. 360; (H. 395, N. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Was Orgetorix tried and condemned? What special preparations did the Helvetii make?"

"NOT FOUND"|"milia: distance. H. 417, 3; LM. 513; A. 257, b; G. 335; B. 181; (H. 379)."

"NOT FOUND"|"radices: object of contingant; ripae, subject."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibus .. . ignovisset: the Romans were said to pardon a conquered people when they allowed them to retain their own government and laws, quibus: H. 426, 2; LM. 531; A. 227; G. 346; B. 187, II, a; (H. 385, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why did Caesar fortify two camps?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 126, line 3. *** iter per Alpes: the pass over the Alps, corresponding to the Great St. Bernard Pass."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. ne .. .offenderet: object clause, depending on verebatur. H. 567; LM. 897; A. 33L/; G. 550; B. 296, 2; (H. 498, III)."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque eo gravius ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  qui si alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed eo deceptum, quod neque COMMISSUM A se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"commissum a se: that any offense (thing) had been committed by them. The subject of the infinitive is here omitted, partly because it is indefinite and partly because it can be readily supplied from quare."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. ut... impetrarent: to obtain by deception whatever (if anything) they could in the way of (in regard to) a truce."

"NOT FOUND"|"Se . . . dubitasse: depending on a verb of saying implied in satisfacerentsumma belli: the whole conduct of the war."

"interim milites LEGIONUM DUARUM quae in novissimo agmine praesidio impedimentis fuerant, proelio nuntiato, cursu incitato in summo colle ab hostibus conspiciebantur,  et t. labienus castris hostium potitus et ex loco superiore quae res in nostris castris gererentur conspicatus x. legionem subsidio nostris misit."|"legionum duarum: these were the 13th and 14th; see p. 112,1. 16."

"NOT FOUND"|"neque = et non : construe the negative with progredi."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 111, line 1. *** uti. . . experirentur: an object clause of purpose; see ut. . . utatur% p. 109, 1. 28."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with the corresponding passage in Caesar. Note and explain the differences."

"NOT FOUND"|"unum: one consideration, explained by quod . . . cognoverat, that he knew."

"NOT FOUND"|"6. cum . . . consisterent: since those in the rear to whom our men had come up, made a stand. The antecedent of quos is not expressed: ventum erat: impersonal."

"NOT FOUND"|"imperio, domicilio: explain cases.NOTES ***BOOK I, 30, 3114. ex magna copia: from the great abundance, i.e. of places which they would find in Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallorum .. . est haec: the mode of attack on the part of the Gauls, the same as that of the Belgians, is the following."

"ubi eum castris se tenere caesar intellexit, ne diutius commeatu prohiberetur, ultra eum locum, QUO IN loco germani consederant, circiter passus dc ab his, castris idoneum locum delegit acieque triplici instructa ad eum locum venit."|"quo in loco res esset: what the situation was."

"SI QUOS adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"Si quos: what pronoun is quos ?"

"hac oratione adducti inter se fidem et ius iurandum dant et regno occupato PER TRES potentissimos ac firmissimos populos totius galliae sese potiri posse sperant."|"per tres populos: the Helvetii, Sequani, and Aedui are meant."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. reliquum neminem: no one else; note the emphatic position of reliquum, and the close connection between neminem and quern."

"NOT FOUND"|"castris: H. 477; LM. 646; A. 249; G. 407; B. 218, 1; (H. 421,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"****ized by GoogleN III4. paucis diebus quibus . . . erat: in a few days after he had arrived."

"NOT FOUND"|"What arrangements at the close of the campaign did Caesar make for his army? Where did he propose to spend the winter himself? What was his object in so doing? See note on ad conventus agendos, p. 98, L 6,BOOK THIRDCampaign of the Year 56 b.c.***Expedition against Certain Alpine Tribes, 1-6Page 125, line 1, Chapter i. *** Cum in Italiam proficisceretur: this was at the close of the campaign of 57 B.C.; see p. 124,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quoniam ... referret and cum ... appellatus esset: explain these subjunctives, but observe that though they are both in causal clauses they are not to be explained in the same way."

"qui cupidius novissimum agmen insecuti alieno loco CUM EQUITATU helvetiorum proelium committunt; et pauci de nostris cadunt."|"cum equitatu nihil possent: since they were weak in cavalry, lit. had no power, etc.; nihil, cognate accusative. H. 409, 1; LM. 503; A. 238;333* 2; B. 176, 4; (H. 371, II)."

"PLURIMUM INTER eos bellovacos et virtute et auctoritate et hominum numero valere: hos posse conficere armata milia centum, pollicitos ex eo numero electa milia lx totiusque belli imperium sibi postulare."|"Plurimum inter eos Bellovaci et virtute et auctoritate et hominum numero valent; hi possunt conficere armata milia centum, polliciti ex eo numero electa milia sexaginta totiusque belli imperium sibi postulant. Suessiones nostri sunt finitimi; fines latissimos feracissimosque agros possident."

"eo die QUO CONSUERAT intervallo hostes sequitur et milia passuum tria ab eorum castris castra ponit."|"quo consuerat intervallo ... sequitur: he follows the enemy at the usual distance**, lit. with the interval with which he was wont (to follow them). What was the usual distance? see p. 66,11. 22-24. quo intervallo, ablative of attendant circumstance. H. 473, 3; LM. 636; A. 248; G. 399; B. 220, 1;(H. 419, HI)."

"id si fieret, intellegebat magno cum periculo provinciae futurum ut homines bellicosos, populi romani inimicos, LOCIS PATENTIBUS maximeque frumentariis finitimos haberet."|"21. locis patentibus: in an open country. Caesar calls the country open, implying that it thus gives easy access to the province."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. vectigalia ... redempta habere: that he had purchased the revenues at a small price; see note on coactum habebat, p. 66, 1. 12. The revenuesOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAwere sold to the highest bidder, who collected them for himself Dumnorix secured these at a low price because no one dared to bid against him; vectigalia are revenues in general; portoria, customs, port duties."

"NOT FOUND"|"convenerat: note the singular; with multitudo, taken collectively."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque eo gravius ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  QUI SI alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed eo deceptum, quod neque commissum a se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"qui si iuvisseot... habiturum: and if they should aid them, *** he would regard them in the same light as the Helvetii; iuvissent represents the future perfect of the direct discourse, and habiturum the future."

"haec derecta materia iniecta contexebantur ac longuriis cratibusque consternebantur;  ac nihilo setius sublicae et ad inferiorem partem fluminis oblique agebantur, quae PRO ARIETE subiectae et cum omni opere coniunctae vim fluminis exciperent,    et aliae item supra pontem mediocri spatio, ut, si arborum trunci sive naves deiciendi operis causa essent a barbaris missae, his defensoribus earum rerum vis minueretur neu ponti nocerent."|"pro ariete : as a buttress."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio FLORENTISSIMIS REBUS domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"florentissimis rebus: ablative absolute, denoting either time or concession."

"NOT FOUND"|"mittit: the object is the omitted antecedent of qui."

"ac si quando magnitudine operis forte superati, extruso mari aggere ac molibus atque his oppidi moenibus adaequatis, suis fortunis desperare coeperant, magno numero navium adpulso, CUIUS REI summam facultatem habebant, omnia sua deportabant seque in proxima oppida recipiebant:  ibi se rursus isdem oportunitatibus loci defendebant."|"cuius rei: of which, referring to navium."

"incredibili celeritate magno spatio paucis diebus confecto, cum iam pecus atque EXTREMA IMPEDIMENTA a nostris tenerentur, ipsi densiores silvas peterent, eius modi sunt tempestates consecutae uti opus necessario intermitteretur et continuatione imbrium diutius sub pellibus milites contineri non possent."|"extrema impedimenta : the rear of the (enemy***s) baggage."

"ad multam noctem etiam ad impedimenta pugnatum est, propterea quod pro vallo carros obiecerunt et e loco superiore IN NOSTROS venientes tela coniciebant et non nulli inter carros rotasque mataras ac tragulas subiciebant nostrosque vulnerabant."|"in nostros venientes: against our men as they advanced."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 22. *** in his locis: i.e. among the Morini; see p. 158,28."

"NOT FOUND"|"mercede: ablative of means."

"provinciae toti quam maximum potest militum numerum imperat (erat omnino in gallia ulteriore legio una), pontem, qui erat ad genavam, iubET REScindi."|"Et . . . res: and besides (lit. after) these facts, many considerations induced him : ea refers to the facts stated by Diviciacus; multae res to considerations which he now proceeds to enumerate."

"NOT FOUND"|"6. equitatui: dative with praeerat; see note on praeficit, p. 62,1. 24."

"nostri tamen, quod neque ordines servare neque firmiter insistere neque signa subsequi poterant ATQUE ALIUS alia ex navi quibuscumque signis occurrerat se adgregabat, magnopere perturbabantur;  hostes vero, notis omnibus vadii, ubi ex litore aliquos singulares ex navi egredientes conspexerant, incitatis equis impeditos adoriebantur,  plures paucos circumsistebant, alii ab latere aperto in universos tela coiciebant."|"7. atque alius alia ex navi . . . adgregabat: and they, one from one vessel, another from another, assembled around whatever standards they met."

"his praeerat viridovix ac summam imperii tenebat earum omnium civitatum quae defecerant, ex quibus exercitum [magnasque copias] coegerat;  atque HIS PAUCIS diebus aulerci eburovices lexoviique, senatu suo interfecto quod auctores belli esse nolebant, portas clauserunt seque cum viridovice coniunxerunt;  magnaque praeterea multitudo undique ex gallia perditorum hominum latronumque convenerat, quos spes praedandi studiumque bellandi ab agri cultura et cotidiano labore revocabat."|"his paucis diebus: a few days after; lit. within these few days, his, these, referring not to the time of writing, but to the time of the events just mentioned; ablative of time."

"NOT FOUND"|"navium: H. 445; LM. 551; A. 214, b; G. 362, r. 3; (H. 398, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chake**B^27. *** Qui cum: when they (the envoys); note the emphatic position of Qui."

"erat ob has causas summa difficultas, quod naves propter magnitudinem NISI IN alto constitui non poterant, militibus autem, ignotis locis, impeditis manibus, magno et gravi onere armorum oppressis simul et de navibus desiliendum et in fluctibus consistendum et cum hostibus erat pugnandum,  cum illi aut ex arido aut paulum in aquam progressi omnibus membris expeditis, notissimis locis, audacter tela coicerent et equos insuefactos incitarent."|"nisi in alto: except in deep water."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter ii. *** flumini: dative with proximi What other construction does proximus admit?"

"NOT FOUND"|"4. Chapter 7. *** Eo: thither, i.e. to Bibrax, de media nocte: about midnight."

"NOT FOUND"|"conferri.. . adesse: note the asyndeton indicating earnestness and haste, that it (the grain) was being collectedwas on the road\ was near at hand."

"c. valerius procillus, cum a custodibus in fuga TRINIS CATENIS vinctus traheretur, in ipsum caesarem hostes equitatu insequentem incidit."|"trinis catenis: with triple chains, three chains. Note trinis, not tribus, because it belongs to a noun rare in the singular."

"NOT FOUND"|"circumitis castris: having ridden round the camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 25. *** vallo: ablative of separation, H. 464; LM. 600; A. 258, a, n. 2; G. 390, 2; B. 214; (H. 414, I),quibus: probably dative with confidebatOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 142, 143lapidibus . . . subministrandis: gerundive construction, ablative of means."

"NOT FOUND"|"exirent: why in the plural?"

"NOT FOUND"|"earum . . . memoria: remembering these things, or because of their recollection of these things. H. 475; LM. 612; A. 245; G. 408; B. 219; (H. 416)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the final result of the war with the Aduatuci?"

"caesar equitatu praemisso subsequebatur omnibus copiis; sed RATIO ORDOQUE agminis aliter se habebat ac belgae ad nervios detulerant."|"ratio ordoque . . . habebat: why is the verb in the singular? H. 392, 4; LM. 471; A. 205, b; G. 285, 2; B. 255, 3; (H. 463, 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 128, line 2. *** hoc superari: they were surpassed in thist i.e. they labored under this disadvantage; explained by quod .. . succedebant."

"interim saepe cum legati ULTRO CITROQUE inter eos mitterentur, ariovistus postulavit ne quem peditem ad conloquium caesar adduceret: vereri se ne per insidias ab eo circumveniretur; uterque cum equitatu veniret: alia ratione sese non esse venturum."|"6. ultro citroque: back and forth."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallis: apparent agent with esse faciendum."

"NOT FOUND"|"verebatur: observe the force of the imperfect, was fearing, was fearful."

"NOT FOUND"|"The student may now write the rest of the chapter in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"eo: thither, i.e.,to the mountain."

"NOT FOUND"|"pulsos: perfect infinitive without esse, depending on renuntiaverunt."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte EORUM PRECIBUS adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"eorum precibus: by their prayers; see p. 63,1. 10."

"NOT FOUND"|"circiter . . . quinque: about five miles; milia passuum: see milia passuum octo, p. 103,1. 18."

"NOT FOUND"|"diligentia, rebus: diligentia, ablative of cause; rebus, means."

"id cum animadvertisset p. crassus adulescens, qui equitatui praeerat, quod expeditior erat quam ii qui inter aciem versabantur, TERTIAM ACIEM laborantibus nostris subsidio misit."|"29. tertiam aciem: the third or rear line, which was kept as a reserve see 108."

"NOT FOUND"|"consuerint: they (the Haedui) were accustomed."

"NOT FOUND"|"What were Caesar***s reasons for opposing Ariovistus?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this direct form with Caesar***s indirect discourse."

"eodem tempore a p. crasso, quem cum legione una miserat ad venetos, venellos, osismos, coriosolitas, esuvios, aulercos, redones, quae sunt maritimae civitates oceanumque attingunt, certior factus est OMNES EAS civitates in dicionem potestatemque populi romani esse redactas."|"omnes eas . . *** esse redactos: infinitive clause, depending on certior factus est."

"atque IN ALTERAM item cohortandi causa profectus pugnantibus occurrit."|"in alteram partem: he went to the right wing; see p. 117,1. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"21. Chapter 36. *** Ius esse ... impediri: Direct:Ius est belli ut qui vicerunt iis quos vicerunt quem ad modum velint imperent; item populus Romanus victis non ad alterius praescriptum, sed ad suum arbitrium imperare consuevit. Si ego populo Romano non praescribo quem ad modum suo iure utatur, non oportet me a populo Romano in meo iure impediri."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWCAESAR***S GALLIC WARrapinis: construction? see suis finibus, p. 55,1. 14."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. quo . . . esset: to which there was no access, etc.; a relative clause, characterizing an indefinite antecedent. H. 591, 1; LM. 836; A. 320; G. 631, 2; B. 283; (II. 503, I). Notice the order of words in this clause, especially the emphatic position of propter paludes."

"NOT FOUND"|"In what year did the events recorded in this second book occur?"

"NOT FOUND"|"567; LM. 897; A. 331,/N.; G. 550, 2; B. 296, 2; (H. 498, N. 1). per insidias: treacherously."

"eo cum de improviso CELERIUSQUE OMNIUM opinione venisset, remi, qui proximi galliae ex belgis sunt, ad eum legatos iccium et andebrogium, primos civitatis, miserunt,  qui dicerent se suaque omnia in fidem atque potestatem populi romani permittere, neque se cum reliquis belgis consensisse neque contra populum romanum coniurasse,   paratosque esse et obsides dare et imperata facere et oppidis recipere et frumento ceterisque rebus iuvare;  reliquos omnes belgas in armis esse, germanosque qui cis rhenum incolant sese cum his coniunxisse,  tantumque esse eorum omnium furorem ut ne suessiones quidem, fratres consanguineosque suos, qui eodem iure et isdem legibus utantur, unum imperium unumque magistratum cum ipsis habeant, deterrere potuerint quin cum iis consentirent."|"celeriusque omnium opinione: and sooner than any on** expected, lit. sooner than the opinion of all. H. 471, 8; LM. 619; A. 247, b\ G. 398, N. 1; B. 217, 4; (H. 417, N. 5)."

"eo cum de improviso celeriusque omnium opinione venisset, remi, qui proximi galliae ex belgis sunt, ad eum legatos iccium et andebrogium, primos civitatis, miserunt,  qui dicerent se suaque omnia in fidem atque potestatem populi romani permittere, neque se cum reliquis belgis consensisse neque contra populum romanum coniurasse,   paratosque esse et obsides dare et imperata facere et oppidis recipere et frumento ceterisque rebus iuvare;  reliquos omnes belgas in armis esse, germanosque qui cis rhenum incolant sese cum his coniunxisse,  tantumque esse eorum omnium furorem ut ne suessiones quidem, fratres consanguineosque suos, qui EODEM IURE et isdem legibus utantur, unum imperium unumque magistratum cum ipsis habeant, deterrere potuerint quin cum iis consentirent."|"eodem iure et isdem legibus: the same right (political principles) and the same laws ; ius denotes the principle of rights justice, on which lex, human law, ought to depend. On iure and legibus, see H. 477; LM. 646; A. 249; G. 407; B. 218, 1; (H. 421, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . inflexisset: since the iron point had bent; explain mood; see cum . .. possent, p. 62,1. 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 164, line 1.***id quod ... accidere: which was inevitable, lit. necessary to happen. H. 399, 6; LM. 830; A. 200, e; G. 614, R. 2; B. 247, I,b; (H. 445, 7)."

"ita commutata fortuna eos qui in spem potiundorum castrorum venerant undique circumventos intercipiunt, et ex hominum milibus amplius xxx, quem numerum barbarorum ad castra venisse constabat, PLUS TERTIA parte interfecta reliquos perterritos in fugam coiciunt ac ne in locis quidem superioribus consistere patiuntur."|"plus tertia parte interfecta: construe with ex hominum . . . XXX; having slain more than one third of etc. H. 471, 4; LM. 618; A. 247, c; G. 296, r. 4; B. 217, 3; (H. 417, 1, N. 2)."

"HAEC UTraque insuper bipedalibus trabibus immissis, quantum eorum tignorum iunctura distabat, binis utrimque fibulis ab extrema parte distinebantur;  quibus disclusis atque in contrariam partem revinctis, tanta erat operis firmitudo atque ea rerum natura ut, quo maior vis aquae se incitavisset, hoc artius inligata tenerentur."|"30. haec . . . ut sint laboris efficiunt: these by constant training (daily exercise) they make capable of the greatest labor ; haec, i.e. haec iumenta, is the antecedent of quae, and the subject of sint. The clause haec . *** *** laboris is the object of efficiunt."

"quod ubi auditum est, conclamant omnes occasionem NEGOTII BENE gerendi amittendam non esse:  ad castra iri oportere."|"negotii bene gerendi: of fighting a successful battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum : although."

"sed peius victoribus sequanis quam haeduis victis accidisse, propterea quod ariovistus, rex germanorum, in eorum finibus consedisset tertiamque partem agri sequani, qui esset optimus totius galliae, occupavisset et nunc DE ALTERA parte tertia sequanos decedere iuberet, propterea quod paucis mensibus ante harudum milia hominum xxiiii ad eum venissent, quibus locus ac sedes pararentur."|"de altera parte tertia: from another third part."

"EOS IMPEDITOS et inopinantes adgressus magnam partem eorum concidit; reliqui sese fugae mandarunt atque in proximas silvas abdiderunt."|"9. Eos impeditos: them, when they were entangled."

"NOT FOUND"|"consedisset: direct consedit."

"NOT FOUND"|"cavere: subject of fuisse."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. profectus: went, lit. having gone. As the main verb, processit, is so far removed from the subject, the English is improved by rendering profectus by a verb."

"perfacile factu esse illis probat conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  non esse dubium QUIN TOTIUS galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"quin totiuS Galliae, etc.: that ihe Helvetii were the most powerful of all the Gauls; totius Galliae = omnium Gallorum, and plurimum possent = potentissimi essent. Galliae, partitive genitive -with plurimum. Compare the other instances of the partitive genitive already noticed."

"eadem autem celeritate adverso colle ad nostra castra atque EOS QUI in opere occupati erant contenderunt."|"eos qui... dederent: object clause of purpose; dederent without ut, representing the imperative in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"summa: construe with difficultas."

"NOT FOUND"|"Pompeio Crasso: Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus were the members of the first triumvirate, formed for mutual help and support, which made Caesar proconsul of Gaul for five years. In April, 56 B.C., they met at Lucca and arranged that Pompey and Crassus should be consuls for the next year, and that Caesar***s proconsulship should be extended to ten years."

"NOT FOUND"|"As the engagement with the Helvetii is the first regular battle described in the Commentaries, it may be interesting to the learner to trace the general course of the action. For two weeks Caesar had been following the Helvetii, with an interval of five miles between the head of his column and the rearguard of the enemy. One favorable opportunity for giving battle had been lost, through the mistake of Considius, as described in chapter 22."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. ut... tenuissent: how the Haedui had held the leadership, etc.; indirect question."

"ita commutata fortuna eos qui in spem potiundorum castrorum venerant undique circumventos intercipiunt, et ex hominum milibus amplius xxx, QUEM NUMERUM barbarorum ad castra venisse constabat, plus tertia parte interfecta reliquos perterritos in fugam coiciunt ac ne in locis quidem superioribus consistere patiuntur."|"quem numerum ... constabat: the evident number of the barbarians who had come to the camp."

"instructo exercitu magis ut loci natura [deiectusque collis] et necessitas temporis quam ut rei militaris ratio atque ordo postulabat, cum diversae legiones ALIAE ALIA in parte hostibus resisterent saepibusque densissimis, ut ante demonstravimus, interiectis prospectus impediretur, neque certa subsidia conlocari neque quid in quaque parte opus esset provideri neque ab uno omnia imperia administrari poterant."|"aliae alia in parte: some (i.e. some legions) in one place and some in another, H. 516, 1; A. 203, c; G. 221, R. i; B. 253, 2; (H. 459, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"perseveraret: the subject may be either Caesar or populus."

"NOT FOUND"|"28. ipsos: they, referring to the Haedui."

"horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus confecti procubuissent, scutis innixi proelium redintegrarent, calones perterritos hostes conspicati etiam inermes armatis occurrerent,  equites vero, ut TURPITUDINEM FUGAE virtute delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae se legionariis militibus praeferrent."|"turpitudinem fugae: see p. 114,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti... consuerint: result."

"capto monte et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et novissimis praesidio erant, ex itinere nostros AB LATERE aperto adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"ab latere aperto; on our right flank. Note the force of ab, indicating that the weapons come from that side."

"NOT FOUND"|"dies . . . supplicatio: a thanksgiving for fifteen days. Public thanksgivings had often been decreed by the senate for signal victories, but never before for so long a period as fifteen days."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this direct discourse with the corresponding passage in Caesar; note and explain differences."

"NOT FOUND"|"timorem ... proficiscatur : the false report of this pretended deserter."

"NOT FOUND"|"Teutonos Cimbrosque: the event here referred to belongs to the latter part of the second century B.C., when the Teutones and the Cimbri, brave and warlike barbarians from the north, invaded Southern Europe."

"ibi vadis repertis partem suarum copiarum traducere conati sunt eo consilio ut, si possent, castellum, cui praeerat q. titurius legatus, expugnarent pontemque interscinderent;  si minus potuissent, agros remorum popularentur, qui magno NOBIS USUI ad bellum gerendum erant, commeatuque nostros prohiberent."|"nobis usui: see subsidio oppidanis, p. 104, 1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo: to which, lit. whither; it is a relative adverb, referring to vicis aedificiisque as its antecedent."

"galba secundis aliquot proeliis factis castellisque compluribus eorum expugnatis, missis ad eum undique legatis obsidibusque datis et pace facta, constituit cohortes duas in nantuatibus conlocare ET IPSE cum reliquis eius legionis cohortibus in vico veragrorum, qui appellatur octodurus hiemare;  qui vicus positus in valle non magna adiecta planitie altissimis montibus undique continetur."|"10. et ipse hiemare: and to winter in person."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne ... iuvarent... habiturum: the verb of saying on which this indirect discourse depends is implied in litteras ... misit.Pages 75, 76]	NOTES	***BOOK I, 25-28eos: referring to the Helvetii."

"cum hostium acies A SINISTRO cornu pulsa atque in fugam coniecta esset, a dextro cornu vehementer multitudine suorum nostram aciem premebant."|"a sinistro cornu: on their left wing; i.e. on the left wing of the Germans."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. omnis .. . earum : in (of) all those maritime districts."

"helvetii iam per angustias et fines sequanorum SUAS COPIAS traduxerant et in haeduorum fines pervenerant eorumque agros populabantur."|"9. suas copias . . . eductas instruxerunt: led their forces out of camp and put them in battle array.	H. 639; A. 292, R.; G. 664, R. 1; B. 337, 2;(H. 549** 5)-About how many legionary soldiers did Caesar probably have at that time ? How many legions would that number make? N8o	CAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 106, 10719. quod esse ... castra: subject of the impersonal veib, demonstratum est; quod: subject of esse, demonstratum est: see p. 103** 1. 8."

"p. considius, qui REI MILITARIS peritissimus habebatur et in exercitu l. sullae et postea in m. crassi fuerat, cum exploratoribus praemittitur."|"rei militaris: H. 451, i; LM. 573; A. 218, a; G. 374; B. 204, 1; (H. 399,1, 2)."

"ipse DE QUARTA vigilia eodem itinere quo hostes ierant ad eos contendit equitatumque omnem ante se mittit."|"de quarta vigilia: see note on de tertia vigilia, p. 64,1. 6."

"eadem nocte accidit ut esset luna plena, QUI DIES a maritimos aestus maximos in oceano efficere consuevit, nostrisque id erat incognitum."|"qui dies: a period which."

"NOT FOUND"|"bello Allobrogum proximo: see note on p. 59,1.22, where Caesar telis us that the Allobroges had been recently subdued."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibus . . . comportari: after (lit. in which) the timber begafi to be collected."

"NOT FOUND"|"accidisset: represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"commeatus ut. .. possent efficiebat: made it possible that supplies could be brought to him, etc.; commeatus . . . possent, an object clause of result, object of efficiebat; cf. fieri uti . . . sumerent, p. 101, 1. 24. H. 571, 3; LM. 902; A. 332; G. 553, 1; B. 297, 1; (H. 501, II, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod . .. gloriarentur: the fact that they boasted, etc. Quod ... gloriarentur quodque ... admirarentur is the subject of pertinere."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 28. ***prope ad internecionem . . . redacto : it has been suggested that the Nervii exaggerated their loss to excite compassion, and that Caesar may have believed their report, but, be that as it may, the Nervii were by no means exterminated, and we shall find them again in arms in the campaigns of 54, 53, and 52 B.c."

"factum eius hostis periculum patrum nostrorum memoria cimbris et teutonis a c. mario pulsis [cum non minorem laudem exercitus quam ipse imperator meritus videbatur]; factum etiam nuper in italia SERVILI TUMULTU, quos tamen aliquid usus ac disciplina, quam a nobis accepissent, sublevarint."|"servili tumultu: during the revolt of the slaves, under Spartacus, 73- 71 B.C. Tumultus is properly a revolt, insurrection, civil war."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... contenderent: substantive clause of purpose, in apposition with sententiae; cf. ut... caperent, p. 126,1. 23."

"NOT FOUND"|"omnem Galliam: Gaul in its limited sense *** Celtic Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"aciem . . . nostris subsidio: accusative and two datives depending on misit; see quem auxilio Caesari . . . miserant, p. 69, 1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"Aulerci, Eburovices, etc.: see Map and Vocabulary."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAPage 146, line 2.***quo : into which."

"horum omnium fortissimi sunt belgae, PROPTEREA QUOD a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important,  proximique sunt germanis, qui trans rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt."|"propterea quod . . . cognoverint: causal clause indirect. H. 643; LM. 1026; A. 336, 2; G. 650; B. 314, 1; (H. 524)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 28. *** post diem quartum quam: three days after, by our reckoning, i.e. on the 30th of August; see note on post diem tertium, p. 150, 1. 11."

"NOT FOUND"|"tumulum: construction? H. 420, 5; LM. 659; A. 261, a; G. 359, N. i; B. 141, 3; (H. 437, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the result of the interview between Caesar and Ariovistus?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quae . . . continerent: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"praeficit: what cases does this verb take? Give the distinction between praeficio and praesum. What case does praesum take ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Magnam: observe its emphatic position."

"NOT FOUND"|"secturaeque: and quarries. That seems to be the meaning of secturae in this passage."

"NOT FOUND"|"aliam: another, less definite than alteram, which would mean the second; aliam = aliam partem."

"non nulli etiam caesari nuntiabant, cum CASTRA MOVERI ac signa ferri iussisset, non fore dicto audientes milites neque propter timorem signa laturos."|"castra moveri, signa ferri: the usual military terms, to break camp, to advance."

"a quibus cum PAULO TARDIUS esset administratum, ipse hora diei circiter iiii."|"paulo tardius: the cavalry sailed three days later; see p. 163,1. 10."

"NOT FOUND"|"sua: their; ipsius, his, lit. of himself, referring to Caesar, used instead of sua, which would be ambiguous here."

"NOT FOUND"|"se exercuerant: had trained themselves or had been trained."

"et x. milites, ut in sinistra parte aciei constiterant, pilis emissis cursu ac lassitudine exanimatos vulneribusque confectos atrebates (nam his ea pars obvenerat) celeriter EX LOCO superiore in flumen compulerunt et transire conantes insecuti gladiis magnam partem eorum impeditam interfecerunt."|"ex loco superiore: i.e. from the ramparts."

"NOT FOUND"|"Diem . . . Haedui: the Haedui put him off day after day. Observe that day after day is almost a literal rendering of Diem ex die."

"quod iussi sunt faciunt, ac subito omnibus portis eruptione facta neque cognoscendi quid fieret neque SUI COLLIGENDI hostibus facultatem relinquunt."|"sui conligendi : of collecting their forces. Observe that sui is plural in sense, though probably in its origin singular in form; hence the singular conligendi. H. 626, 3; LM. 1000; A. 298, a; G. 428, R. I; B. 339, 5; (H. 542,27. in spem venerant: had entertained the hope."

"NOT FOUND"|"reprehendat: subjunctive in indirect question."

"quod cum animadvertisset caesar, scaphas longarum navium, item speculatoria navigia militibus compleri iussit, ET QUOS laborantes conspexerat, his subsidia submittebat."|"et quos : and of those whom."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 144, line 1. *** contendissent: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"partim . . . partim: partly . . . partly, some . . . others."

"NOT FOUND"|"Write this in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"moribus : see note on officio . . . adsuefacti, p. 146,1. 18."

"NOT FOUND"|"conficere: to raise; lit. finish, make up the full number."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 94, line 2, Chapter 48.***sub monte: at the foot of the mountain, probably the Vosges."

"hac oratione habita mirum in modum conversae sunt omnium mentes summaque alacritas et cupiditas belli gerendi INNATA EST,  princepsque x. legio per tribunos militum ei gratias egit quod de se optimum iudicium fecisset, seque esse ad bellum gerendum paratissimam confirmavit."|"innata est: agrees with cupiditas, not with the compound subject."

"erant eius modi fere situs oppidorum ut posita in extremis lingulis promunturiisque neque pedibus aditum haberent, cum ex alto se aestus incitavisset, quod [bis] accidit semper horarum xii spatio, neque navibus, quod rursus minuente aestu naves IN VADIS adflictarentur."|"in vadis consisterent: they rode on the shoals."

"quos cum apud se in castris ariovistus conspexisset, exercitu suo praesente conclamavit: QUID AD se venirent?"|"29. Quid ad se venirent: give the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. consuessent: H. 238; LM. 385; A. 128, a; G. 131, 1; B. 116, i;How did the Aduatuci at first regard the preparations which the Romans were making before their town? What finally moved them to surrender?"

"populi romani hanc esse consuetudinem, ut socios atque amicos non modo SUI NIHIL deperdere, sed gratia, dignitate, honore auctiores velit esse; quod vero ad amicitiam populi romani attulissent, id iis eripi quis pati posset?"|"sui nihil: nothing of their own."

"NOT FOUND"|"populabantur: cf. vastari and depopulatis, lines 14 and 18 below."

"NOT FOUND"|"posset: the subject is a pronoun referring to frumentum; explain mood."

"quod si eum interfecerit, multis sese nobilibus principibusque populi romani GRATUM ESSE facturum (id se ab ipsis per eorum nuntios compertum habere), quorum omnium gratiam atque amicitiam eius morte redimere posset."|"gratum esse facturum: he would do a favor; probably not an empty boast, as Caesar had many political foes among the nobles."

"si quid accidat romanis, summam in spem per helvetios REGNI OBTINENDI venire; imperio populi romani non modo de regno, sed etiam de ea quam habeat gratia desperare."|"regni obtinendi: is obtinendi gerund or gerundive ?"

"eodem tempore [quo haedui] ambarri, necessarii et consanguinei haeduorum, caesarem certiorem faciunt SESE DEPOPULATIS agris non facile ab oppidis vim hostium prohibere."|"sese depopulatis agris . . . prohibere: that their lands had been devastated\ and that it was with difficulty, etc.; depopulatis, passive in meaning, in the ablative absolute with agris, but best rendered by a clause; in the direct form by a principal clause. H. 639; A. 292, R.; G. 664, R. i; B. 337, 2;demonstrant: inform, a common meaning in Caesar, sibi: indirect object with esse reliqui."

"his rebus et suam rem familiarem auxisse et facultates ad largiendum magnas comparasse;  magnum numerum equitatus suo sumptu semper alere et circum se habere,  neque solum domi, sed etiam apud finitimas civitates largiter posse, atque HUIUS POTENTIAE causa matrem in biturigibus homini illic nobilissimo ac potentissimo conlocasse;  ipsum ex helvetiis uxorem habere, sororum ex matre et propinquas suas nuptum in alias civitates conlocasse."|"huius potentiae causa: for the sake of this influence, the usual meaning of causa following a genitive. Compare potentia, personal influence, with potestas, lawful authority, civil and official, and imperium, military authority."

"idem facit caesar equitatumque omnem, ad numerum quattuor milium, quem ex omni provincia et haeduis atque eorum sociis COACTUM HABEBAT, praemittit, qui videant quas in partes hostes iter faciant."|"coactum habebat: had collected***a combination similar to the English, lit. had, or held, having been collected."

"NOT FOUND"|"4* colles: probably the heights of St. Gildas."

"NOT FOUND"|"earn partem: i.e. the left wing of the enemy, opposite Caesar***s right wing."

"NOT FOUND"|"flumine, navibus: ablatives of means."

"NOT FOUND"|"vocatis ... mercatoribus: concessive; although, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 4. *** In eadem causa: in the same situation***supra diximus: p. 145,1. 2."

"EORUM UNA pars, quam gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine rhodano, continetur garumna flumine, oceano, finibus belgarum, attingit etiam ab sequanis et helvetiis flumen rhenum, vergit ad septentriones."|"Eorum una pars: one part of their country, lit. one part of them. The name of a people or a pronoun referring to a people is sometimes thus used for the name of the country. Eorum, of them, for of their country; cf. Belgae oriuntur, pertinent, p. 58, 1. 4."

"NOT FOUND"|"insignia: these were probably the plumes and other ornaments, which were usually laid aside on the march, but resumed before battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"magni: of great weight or value. H. 448,1; LM. 576; A. 252, a; G. 380; B. 203, 3; (H. 404)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quae: attracted from quos to agree with the predicative nominative, civitates; see note on Belgas quam . . . partem, p. 99,1. 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"10. Chapter 14.***neque iis noceri posse: and that no harm could be done them ; iis, dative with noceri; see his persuaderi, p. 107,1. 19."

"postridie eius diei, quod omnino biduum supererat, cum exercitui frumentum metiri oporteret, et quod a bibracte, oppido haeduorum longe maximo et copiosissimo, non amplius milibus passuum xviii aberat, REI FRUMENTARIAE prospiciendum existimavit; itaque iter ab helvetiis avertit ac bibracte ire contendit."|"rei frumentariae prospiciendum: that he ought to provide for supplies. H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III; (H. 386)."

"NOT FOUND"|"^proximi Rhenum: what other construction have you found with proximus? see proximi . . . Germanis, p. 55,1. 10; for the accusative, see H. 435, 2;L 261, a; G. 359, N. 1; B. 141, 3; (H. 391, 2)."

"gallis magno ad pugnam erat impedimento quod pluribus eorum scutis uno ictu pilorum transfixis et conligatis, cum ferrum se inflexisset, neque evellere neque sinistra impedita satis commode pugnare poterant,  MULTI UT diu iactato bracchio praeoptarent scutum manu emittere et nudo corpore pugnare."|"multi ut praeoptarent: so that many preferred; observe the emphatic position of multi ; subjunctive of result, like ut. . . possent, p. 59, 1. 19."

"reperiebat etiam in quaerendo caesar, QUOD PROELIUM equestre adversum paucis ante diebus esset factum, initium eius fugae factum a dumnorige atque eius equitibus (nam equitatui, quem auxilio caesari haedui miserant, dumnorix praeerat): eorum fuga reliquum esse equitatum perterritum."|"quod proelium ... esset factum: in regard to the fact that an unsuccessful engagement of our cavalry had taken place ; quod, as to the fact that, is a conjunction. In this sense it is used with the indicative in the direct discourse."

"ipse interim IN COLLE medio triplicem aciem instruxit legionum quattuor veteranarum; in summo iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque in unum locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"in COlle medio: midway up the hill; see summits mons, p. 71, 1. 11."

"cum illi orbe facto sese defenderent, celeriter AD CLAMOREM hominum circiter milia vi convenerunt; qua re nuntiata, caesar omnem ex castris equitatum suis auxilio misit."|"ad clamorem: in response to a shout."

"NOT FOUND"|"30. Haeduis se . . . afuturum: Direct discourse:Haeduis ego obsides non reddam neque his neque eorum sociis iniuria bellum inferam, si in eo manebunt quod convenit stipendiumque quotannis pendent; si id non fecerint, longe iis fraternum nomen populi Romani aberit."

"NOT FOUND"|"25. M. Metius: see p. 92,1. 25."

"germanico bello confecto multis de causis caesar statuit sibi rhenum esse transeundum; quarum illa fuit iustissima quod, cum videret germanos tam facile impelli ut in galliam venirent, suis quoque rebus eos timere voluit, CUM INTELLEGERENT et posse et audere populi romani exercitum rhenum transire."|"26. cum ... intellegerent: when they perceived, etc., here, as often, the temporal clause, denotes both time and cause; see cum id nuntiatum esset, p.6o,l.. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"loco opportuno: as the place was favorable ; ablative absolute."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne ... possent: negative purpose; see ne .. . confligendum sit, p. 102,3****instruxisset: why subjunctive? If not dependent on possent, it would be in the future perfect indicative; see **... introduxerint, p. 102, 1. 32."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . insinuaverunt: the perfect indicative of customary action."

"QUOD CUM fieret, non inridicule quidam ex militibus x. legionis dixit: plus quam pollicitus esset caesarem facere; pollicitum se in cohortis praetoriae loco x. legionem habiturum ad equum rescribere."|"Quod cum . . . partibus haberet: while this had around it (in circuitu) on all sides. The town occupied the summit of a hill which was precipitous on all sides, except in one place, two hundred feet wide, where there was a gentle ascent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Eo .. . dari: that he had less hesitation on that account (lit. that less of hesitation was given him, etc.). Eo, ablative of cause, explained by quod . . . teneret. Observe that Caesar***s reply, occupying most of the chapter, is in the indirect discourse, and note carefully the moods used."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam MAGNIS ITINERIBUS contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, cum his quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"magnis itineribus: by forced marches; see 75."

"de tertia vigilia t. labienum, legatum pro praetore, cum duabus legionibus et iis ducibus qui iter cognoverant summum iugum montis ascendere iubet; QUID SUI consilii sit ostendit."|"quid sui consilii sit: what his plan is; consilii, predicate genitive with quid sit."

"NOT FOUND"|"proelio . . . incitato: advancing at full speed on hearing of the battle; ablatives absolute. Give a literal rendering."

"amicitiam populi romani SIBI ORNAMENTO et praesidio, non detrimento esse oportere, atque se hac spe petisse."|"sibi ornamento: construction ? see Gallis . . . impedimento, p. 74,1. 6."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 97, line 4, Chapter 53.***viribus: probably ablative of means, as confido usually takes the ablative of the means on which one relies, though it takes the dative of the person trusted."

"NOT FOUND"|"ei: in him ; dative, depending on fidem habebat."

"helvetii cum omnibus suis carris secuti impedimenta in unum locum contulerunt; ipsi confertissima acie, reiecto nostro equitatu, PHALANGE FACTA sub primam nostram aciem successerunt."|"phalange facta: the Macedonian phalanx, so celebrated in ancient warfare, was doubtless unknown to the Gauls. The Helvetic phalanx probably consisted simply of a body of soldiers in close array, under the cover of their shields close locked over their heads. This phalanx resembled the Roman testudo, as seen in plate VIII."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum: although, concessive."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . prohibebantur: this clause supplies the place of a predicate noun after fuit. The Suebi occupied a vast tract of country in Germany from the Baltic to the Danube, and from the Elbe to the Vistula."

"NOT FOUND"|"vacuam: predicate accusative with relictam."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . sumerent: substantive clause, subject of fieri. H. 571,1; LM. 902; A. 332, a, 2; G. 553, 3; B. 297, 2; (H. 501,1, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Illi: subject of pervenerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"id : that, i.e. the favor asked in ne ... moveret."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 143, line 1. *** eas... munitiones: i.e. those near the decuman gate."

"postquam omnes belgarum copias in unum locum coactas ad se venire vidit neque iam longe abesse ab iis quos miserat exploratoribus et ab remis cognovit, flumen axonam, quod est IN EXTREMIS remorum finibus, exercitum traducere maturavit atque ibi castra posuit."|"in extremis finibus: in the most remote part of the territory. This must not be taken in too strict a sense, as Bibrax was still more remote."

"interim barbari nuntios in omnes partes dimiserunt paucitatemque nostrorum militum suis praedicaverunt et quanta praedae faciendae atque in perpetuum SUI LIBERANDI facultas daretur, si romanos castris expulissent, demonstraverunt."|"sui liberandi: of freeing themselves; i.e. from the Roman invaders. H. 626, 3; LM. 1000; A. 298, a; G. 428, R. I; B. 339, 5; (H. 542, I, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"The Romans paid great attention to the winter quarters of their armies. They not only fortified them very strongly, but also furnished them with many accommodations for the convenience and comfort of the soldiers."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARipsius COpiae: his own (Caesar***s) forces."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . caperet. . . proderet: subjunctive in an object clause of purpose; see ut. . . patiantur, p. 62,1. II."

"tum demum ariovistus partem suarum copiarum, QUAE CASTRA minora oppugnaret, misit."|"quae castra: and this camp."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod AB NON nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  AB NON nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"ab non nullis etiam: Caesar here adds that the Belgae were also urged on by certain Gauls, who, from motives of ambition, were hostile to the Romans."

"NOT FOUND"|"What synonyms have we noticed in connection with this chapter? What caused the panic in Caesar***s army? With whom did it begin?"

"NOT FOUND"|"virtuti: H. 426, 2; LM. 531; A. 227; G. 346; B. 187, II, a\9. traditis armis: if their arms should be given up ; ablative absolute. Sibi praestare: that it was better for them. What is the subject of praestare?"

"quod si praeterea nemo sequatur, tamen se cum sola decima legione iturum, de qua non dubitet, sibique eam PRAETORIAM COHORTEM futuram."|"2. praetoriam cohortem: praetorian cohort, or body guard. The select band which attended the person of the commander was called the praetorian cohort."

"illi alias eruptione temptata, alias cuniculis AD AGGEREM vineasque actis (cuius rei sunt longe peritissimi aquitani, propterea quod multis locis apud eos aerariae secturaeque sunt), ubi diligentia nostrorum nihil his rebus profici posse intellexerunt, legatos ad crassum mittunt seque in deditionem ut recipiat petunt."|"ad aggerem: i.e. for the mound which he was erecting to place himself on a level with the enemy***s defenses."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 159, line 1. *** quam classem: antecedent in the relative clause. H. 399, 3; A. 200, b; G. 616; B. 251,4; (H. 445, 9)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAquam rem: that this honor."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 92, line 1. *** committendum non ... ut... dici posset: he did notthink that he ought to alloiu it to be said after the enemy were repulsed\ that they, etc., i.e. he did not mean to give the enemy excuse for so saying; committendum is an impersonal infinitive without esse ; the subject is the clause, ut ... dici posset.. . circumventos."

"NOT FOUND"|"29. omittendum: periphrastic infinitive without esse."

"accedebat ut, cum [saevire ventus coepisset et] SE VENTO dedissent, et tempestatem ferrent facilius et in vadis consisterent tutius et ab aestu relictae nihil saxa et cautes timerent; quarum rerum omnium nostris navibus casus erat extimescendus."|"se vento dedissent: they were running before the wind, a nautical expression, lit. they had given themselves to the wind."

"omni ora maritima celeriter ad suam sententiam perducta communem legationem ad p. crassum mittunt, SI VELIT suos recuperare, obsides sibi remittat."|"si . .. velit. . . oportere: conditional sentence of the first form, if he (Caesar) wished anything of him (Ariovistus), etc. H. 412; LM. 524; A. 238, b; G. 341, N. 2; B. 178, d; (H. 375)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . .' . fluit: i.e. because they were separated only by the Rhone. Allobrogum: this warlike people had been conquered by the Romans121 B.C.; but having revolted, they had recently (nuper), 61 B.C., beef again reduced to subjection.	/pacati erant: had been brought to a state of peace, had been/pacified, a rCAESAR***S GALLIC WARfavorite euphemism with Caesar for had been conquered. Note the difference in meaning between paco, placo, and placeo ; see Vocabulary. These words often confuse students. Caesar uses them all."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAPages 122-124] NOTES *** BOOK II, 31-35facere dixerunt: note the significance of the present facere instead of the future, implying that the Aduatuci on learning from their envoys the demands of Caesar were already doing his bidding."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF 10CAESAR***S GALLIC WAR. 16. Chapter 25.*** naves longas: construe with removeri iussit."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 108, line 1. *** qui .. . moraretur : to detain the rear, relative clause of purpose, novissimum agmen : the rear ; lit. the newest line."

"NOT FOUND"|"ab Arari... averterant: which way had they turned? see campaign map."

"at hostes, ubi primum nostros equites conspexerunt, quorum erat v milium numerus, cum ipsi non amplius dccc equites haberent, quod ii qui frumentandi causa erant trans mosam profecti nondum redierant, nihil timentibus nostris, quod LEGATI EORUM paulo ante a caesare discesserant atque is dies indutiis erat ab his petitus, impetu facto celeriter nostros perturbaverunt;  rursus his resistentibus consuetudine sua ad pedes desiluerunt subfossis equis compluribus nostris deiectis reliquos in fugam coniecerunt atque ita perterritos egerunt ut non prius fuga desisterent quam in conspectum agminis nostri venissent."|"legati eorum: their envoys***, i.e. the envoys of the Germans."

"NOT FOUND"|"coicerent: why plural? H. 389, 15 LM. 472; A. 205, c, 1; G. 211, r. 1; B. 234** 4** (H. 4^1 0*consistendi: H. 626; LM. 998; A. 298; G. 428; B. 338; (H. 542,1), nulli: dative of possessor with erat. H. 430; LM. 542; A. 231; G. 349;B. 190; (H. 387)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What uses of the subjunctive have you found in this chapter?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Other Events of the Campaign, 34, 35Chapter 34.***a P. Crasso: construe with factus est."

"cum ex dediticiis belgis reliquisque gallis complures caesarem secuti una iter facerent, quidam ex his, ut postea ex captivis cognitum est, eorum dierum consuetudine itineris nostri exercitus perspecta, nocte ad nervios pervenerunt atque his demonstrarunt INTER SINGULAS legiones impedimentorum magnum numerum intercedere, neque esse quicquam negotii, cum prima legio in castra venisset reliquaeque legiones magnum spatium abessent, hanc sub sarcinis adoriri;  qua pulsa impedimentisque direptis, futurum ut reliquae contra consistere non auderent."|"inter singulas legiones: between the several legions."

"NOT FOUND"|"L. Cassium . . . sub iugum missum: this defeat of the Roman army :^EIunder Cassius occurred near the Lake of Geneva, 107 B.C., forty-nine years ;i before the arrival of Caesar in Gaul.	-Uoccisum, pulsum, missum, concedendum: infinitives without esse. *** :i)M sub iugum: the yoke consisted of a spear, supported horizontally by two ;;others placed in an upright position. The conquered army was compelled to 5il pass under this yoke in token of complete submission; cf. English subjugate. ,; ."

"NOT FOUND"|"Rhodanus: the Rhone, i.e. only the Rhone, which was fordable in several places."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. Chapter 26. *** Nostri: construe with perturbabantur."

"legionem caesar, QUAM EQUIS devexerat, passibus cc ab eo tumulo constituit."|"quam equis devexerat: which he had brought on horseback, referring to the tenth legion."

"erant hae difficultates belli gerendi quas supra ostendimus, sed tamen multa caesarem ad id bellum incitabant:  iniuria retentorum equitum romanorum, rebellio facta post deditionem, defectio datis obsidibus, tot civitatum coniuratio, in primis ne HAC PARTE neglecta reliquae nationes sibi idem licere arbitrarentur."|"hac parte neglecta : if he should neglect this instance."

"caesar singulis legionibus singulos legatos et quaestorem praefecit, uti eos testes suae quisque virtutis haberet;  ipse A DEXTRO cornu, quod eam partem minime firmam hostium esse animadverterat, proelium commisit."|"a dextro COmu: on the right wing; Latin idiom, from the right wing, as the action proceeded from that quarter."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cupidius: too eagerly."

"NOT FOUND"|"pontem . .. curat: causes a bridge to be built over the Arar; probably a bridge of boats made of the vessels in which he had conveyed his provisions up the river. On pontem . . . curat, see H. 622; LM. 994; A. 294, d; G. 430; B. 337, 7; (H. 544, n. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"nostra: i.e. nostra lingua = lingua Latina. Caesar regularly writes in the third person, but he***often uses nos for Romani and noster for Latinus, Romanus, or Romanorum."

"ita sive casu sive consilio deorum immortalium QUAE PARS civitatis helvetiae insignem calamitatem populo romano intulerat, ea princeps poenam persolvit."|"quae pars . . . ea: that part ivhich, lit. what part, that."

"cognito caesaris adventu ariovistus legatos ad eum mittit: quod antEA DE conloquio postulasset, id per se fieri licere, quoniam propius accessisset seque id sine periculo facere posse existimaret."|"ea de causa : explained by the causal clause, quod . . . existimabat."

"id ea de causa faciebat quod cum tanta multitudine hostium, praesertim EO ABSENTE qui summam imperii teneret, nisi aequo loco aut oportunitate aliqua data legato dimicandum non existimabat."|"eo absente qui: in the absence of him who, i.e. of Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"On what two grounds does Diviciacus rest his appeal in behalf of his brother? How does Caesar treat this appeal?"

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numquam interdiu, saepius noctu, SI PERRUMPERE possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"si perrumpere, etc.: having attempted to force a passage, lit. having tried whether (if) they were able to break through; si. .. possent, indirect question. H. 649,11,3; LM.812; A. 334,/; G. 460, I, b; B. 300,3; (H. 529, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut copiam facerent: to furnish a supply."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR17. summis utriusque rebus: and matters of the highest importance to both, lit. of both."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui ... recusaret: relative clause of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"militibus : depending on inlata."

"NOT FOUND"|"Condrusos, etc.: posse conficere may be supplied from line 5 above."

"veneti reliquaeque item civitates cognito caesaris adventu [certiores facti], simul quod quantum in se facinus admisissent intellegebant, [legatos, QUOD NOMEN ad omnes nationes sanctum inviolatumque semper fuisset, retentos ab se et in vincula coniectos,] pro magnitudine periculi bellum parare et maxime ea quae ad usum navium pertinent providere instituunt, hoc maiore spe quod multum natura loci confidebant."|"quod nomen *** . . fuisset: is this clause Caesar***s statement of a fact, or does it claim to represent the thought of the Veneti?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ducere, dicere: historical infinitives."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipsi: and they themselves, in contrast with the cattle and baggage. Note the common omission of et before this pronoun."

"NOT FOUND"|"nobilissimos: the chief nobles, or the highest of the nobility."

"NOT FOUND"|"commeatu: ablative of separation; cf. proelio supersedere, p. 104, 1. 17; H.464; LM. 600; A. 243, a; G. 390, 2; B. 214; (H. 414)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Eo: therein, or in them ; i.e. in the wagons and carts."

"nam propter frigora [quod gallia sub septentrionibus, ut ANTE DICTUM est, posita est,] non modo frumenta in agris matura non erant, sed ne pabuli quidem satis magna copia suppetebat;  eo autem frumento quod flumine arari navibus subvexerat propterea uti minus poterat quod iter ab arari helvetii averterant, a quibus discedere nolebat."|"26. ante dictum est: see p. 162,1. 25,Page 167, line 2. *** tanto spatio quantum: as far as, H. 417, 3; LM. 655; A. 257, b\ G. 403; (H. 379, 2)."

"caesar honoris diviciaci atque haeduorum causa sese eos in fidem recepturum et conservaturum dixit, et QUOD ERAT civitas magna inter belgas auctoritate atque hominum multitudine praestabat, dc obsides poposcit."|"quod erat: Caesar***s reason."

"NOT FOUND"|"What instances of the Ablative have you noticed in the last two chapters?"

"namque ipsorum naves ad hunc modum factae armataeque erant: carinae aliquanto planiores quam nostrarum navium, quo facilius vada ac decessum aestus excipere possent;  prorae admodum erectae atque item puppes, ad magnitudinem fluctuum tempestatumque accommodatae;  naves totae factae ex robore AD QUAMVIS vim et contumeliam perferendam;  transtra ex pedalibus in altitudinem trabibus, confixa clavis ferreis digiti pollicis crassitudine;  ancorae pro funibus ferreis catenis revinctae;  pelles pro velis alutaeque tenuiter confectae, [hae] sive propter inopiam lini atque eius usus inscientiam, sive eo, quod est magis veri simile, quod tantas tempestates oceani tantosque impetus ventorum sustineri ac tanta onera navium regi velis non satis commode posse arbitrabantur."|"ad quamvis ... perferendam: so as to sustain any force and violence; see Ad eas res conficiendas, p. 57, 1. 27."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 4. *** Cum . . . quaereret: see cum esset, p 99,1. 1, and cum . . . venisset, p. ioi, 1. I, and note with what frequency Caesar uses cum with the subjunctive."

"hoc facto proelio caesar neque iam sibi legatos audiendos neque condiciones accipiendas arbitrabatur ab iis qui PER DOLUM atque insidias petita pace ultro bellum intulissent;  expectare vero dum hostium copiae augerentur equitatus reverteretur summae dementiae esse iudicabat,  et cognita gallorum infirmitate quantum iam apud eos hostes uno proelio auctoritatis essent consecuti sentiebat; quibus ad consilia capienda nihil spatii dandum existimabat."|"per dolum atque insidias: do the facts warrant this grave charge ? Is itcertain that the German cavalry had any knowledge of a truce?"

"biduo post ariovistus ad caesarem legatos misit: velle se de IIS REBUS quae inter eos agi coeptae neque perfectae essent agere cum eo: uti aut iterum conloquio diem constitueret aut, si id minus vellet, ex suis legatis aliquem ad se mitteret."|"iis rebus, etc.: having accomplished those objects for which, etc.: rebus is explained by the three clauses of purpose in apposition with it, viz. ut. .. iniceret, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 76, line 1, Chapter 28. *** resciit: this word means to ascertain something which has been concealed or which is unexpected."

"in castris helvetiorum tabulae repertae sunt litteris graecis confectae et ad caesarem relatae, quibus in tabulis nominatim ratio confecta erat, qui numerus domo exisset EORUM QUI arma ferre possent, et item separatim, quot pueri, senes mulieresque."|"eorum qui: of tkose who, i.e. of the soldiers of the 13th and 14th legions, who formed the rear guard of the baggage train."

"NOT FOUND"|"In the indirect discourse in this chapter, what moods have you found in the principal clauses? What mood in the subordinate clauses?"

"HIS REBUS fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte homines bellandi cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"His rebus fiebat ut: lit. it was brought about by these things that; render more freely, the result of all this was that."

"hostes impeditos nostri in flumine adgressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt;  per eorum corpora reliquos audacissime TRANSIRE CONANTES multitudine telorum reppulerunt primosque, qui transierant, equitatu circumventos interfecerunt."|"2. transire conantes insecuti: pursuing them (the Atrebates) endeavor- ing to cross it,5. rursus resistentes hostes: the enemy who were again making a stand; hostes, object of coniecerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"in hibema in Sequanos: into winter quarters among the Sequani. Here the Latin idiom requires in Sequanos, not in Sequanis, to designate the place into which the army was led."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . *** *** putarent: Caesar***s reason at the time of the censure; hence the subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"13. introduxissent: why subjunctive ? It represents the future perfect; see cum . . . instruxisset', p. 106,1, 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"nequiquam: without reason or thoughtlessly."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne ... conferant: from bringing in the grain, subjunctive of purpose; see ne causam diceret\ p. 58,1. 27. The plural is used because of the idea of plurality involved in multitudinem."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUID vellent, ad id."|"16. si quid . . . esset: if there should be any need of action; quid: adverbial accusative. H. 477, III; LM. 646; A. 243, e; G. 406; B. 218, 2; (H. 414, IV)."

"QUI SUUM timorem in rei frumentariae simulationem angustiasque itineris conferrent, facere arroganter, cum aut de officio imperatoris desperare aut praescribere viderentur."|"Qui suum timorem . . . conferrent: those who ascribed their own fear to a pretended anxiety about supplies, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"satisfactione: excuse or apology."

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam tanto suo populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus esset, hanc sibi populoque romano GRATIAM REFERRET ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, haec esse quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret ut quos illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"gratiam referret: gratiam referre means to return or requite a favor; gratiam habere, to have or feel gratitude, to be grateful; gratiam ageret to express gratitude, to thank."

"NOT FOUND"|"Treveri: like Haedui, in partitive apposition with legati."

"NOT FOUND"|"hi . . . illi: the latter ... the former."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit UT NON mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"ut non modo ... defuerit: result."

"post eius mortem nihilo minus helvetii ID QUOD constituerant facere conantur, ut e finibus suis exeant."|"id, quod erat: that which was actually the case, explained by aliquid . . . consilii."

"NOT FOUND"|"circumvenire: depends on coeperunt to be supplied from the end of sentence."

"qua de causa helvetii quoque reliquos gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi IN EOrum finibus bellum gerunt."|"13. In eo flumine: over this river."

"caesar loquendi finem fecit seque ad suos recepit suisque imperavit NE QUOD omnino telum in hostes reicerent."|"ne quod: why not ne quid?"

"NOT FOUND"|"priusquam *** *** *** fieret: see prius .. *** quam ... cognosci posset, p. 143,17. eorum copiis : on their stores, i.e. on the stores of provisions which the Menapii had collected for their own use."

"NOT FOUND"|"dum . . . pervenirent: like dum . . . convenirent; p. 60,1. 23.	^What subjunctives have you noticed in the last two chapters ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"What important personages are mentioned in this chapter?"

"ea re permissa diem concilio constituerunt et iure iurando NE QUIS enuntiaret, nisi quibus communi consilio mandatum esset, inter se sanxerunt."|"ne quis enuntiaret: object clause of purpose, depending on sanxerunt, nisi quibus... mandatum esset: except (lit. if not) those to whom it (that duty or office) should be'officially (communi consilio) assigned: man- datum esset, attracted into the subjunctive by enuntiaret/ cf. quem . . . iudicassent, above."

"NOT FOUND"|"What use did the Romans make of the Vinea and the Agger ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"exspectari, iretur: impersonal passive; render actively, to hesitate, to go. The clause, exspectari ... iretur, is in apposition with voces."

"NOT FOUND"|"auxilii: construe with quid."

"NOT FOUND"|"absentis: though absent."

"quod ubi caesar resciit, quorum per fines ierant his uti conquirerent et reducerent, si sibi purgati esse vellent, imperavit; reductos in hostium numero habuit;   RELIQUOS OMNES obsidibus, armis, perfugis traditis in deditionem accepit."|"reliquos omnes: eighty thousand in number according to Plutarch."

"NOT FOUND"|"sustinerent: to act on the defensive or to sustain the attack."

"quaerit EX SOLO ea quae in conventu dixerat."|"ex solo: from him (Liscus) in private."

"NOT FOUND"|"Consuesse: note meaning and use of this tense."

"NOT FOUND"|"fuerunt: agreeing with (he predicate noun milia, not with its subject Summa."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallicis armis atque insignibus: for the Gallic arms and for the various devices on their shields and helmets, see 38, 39, and plate I."

"PROVINCIAE TOTI quam maximum potest militum numerum imperat (erat omnino in gallia ulteriore legio una), pontem, qui erat ad genavam, iubet rescindi."|"Provinciae toti . . . imperat: he levies upon the whole province, i.e. upon the Roman province in Ulterior Gaul. What case regularly follows impero in the sense of command? Note that here it takes the accusative of the object demanded or ordered with the dative of the person or object to which the order is given. H. 424; LM. 533; A. 225, 6; G. 345; B. 187; (H. 384)."

"NOT FOUND"|"consuetudinis: see imperitum . . . rerum, p. 90,1. 25."

"NOT FOUND"|"esse mercatoribus: that traders have; mercatoribus, dative of possessor; see potestas erat nulli, p. 103, 1. 27."

"ibi praesidium ponit et in altera parte fluminis q. titurium sabinum legatum cum sex cohortibus relinquit; castra in altitudinem pedum xii vallo FOSSAQUE DUODEVIGINTI pedum muniri iubet."|"16. fossaque duodeviginti pedum: and with a moat eighteen feet wide; pedum, descriptive genitive. H. 440, 3; LM. 558; A. 215, b\ G. 365, 2; B. 203; (H. 396, V)."

"futurum esse paucis annis uti omnes ex galliae finibus pellerentur atque omnes germani rhenum transirent; neque enim conferendum esse gallicum cum germanorum agro neque HANC CONSUETUDINEM victus cum illa comparandam."|"hanc consuetudinem victus: this our mode of lifet lit. this, i.e. the one near the speaker, or belonging to him, referring to the mode of life in Gaul, while ilia refers to that of the Germans."

"cum civitas ob eam rem incitata armis ius suum exsequi conaretur multitudinemque hominum EX AGRIS magistratus cogerent, orgetorix mortuus est;  neque abest suspicio, ut helvetii arbitrantur, quin ipse sibi mortem consciverit."|"ex agris deducere: referring to the assembling of their forces, as remigrare in agros referred to the disbanding of them; see p. 163, 1. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"auxilio Caesari: H.433; LM. 548; A. 233, a; G. 356; B. 191,2; (H. 390)."

"hi centum pagos habere dicuntur, ex quibus quotannis SINGULA MILIA armatorum bellandi causa ex finibus educunt."|"8. singula milia: each a thousand\ or a thousand apiece***lo.	illos : those, the warriors."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... exirent: object clause of purpose, direct object of persuasit, while civitati is the indirect object of the same verb. H. 565; LM. 894; A. 331, d; G. 546; B. 295, 1; [H. 498)."

"NOT FOUND"|"patrum . . .'memoria: within the memory of our fathers, in the year 107 b.c. H. 487; LM. 631; A. 256; G. 393; B. 231; (H. 429)."

"nam hoc toto proelio, cum AB HORA septima ad vesperum pugnatum sit, aversum hostem videre nemo potuit."|"ab hora quarta: what o***clock? Remember that the Roman day began at sunrise."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with Caesar***s indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"mensibus: ablative of measure of difference. H. 479, 3; 488, I; LM. 655; A. 259, d; G. 403, 4; B. 357, 1; (H. 430)."

"nostri primo INTEGRIS VIRIBUS fortiter propugnare neque ullum flustra telum ex loco superiore mittere, et quaecumque pars castrorum nudata defensoribus premi videbatur, eo occurrere et auxilium ferre,  sed hoc superari quod diuturnitate pugnae hostes defessi proelio excedebant, alii INTEGRIS VIRIBUS succedebant;  quarum rerum a nostris propter paucitatem fieri nihil poterat, ac non modo defesso ex pugna excedendi, sed ne saucio quidem eius loci ubi constiterat relinquendi ac sui recipiendi facultas dabatur."|"integris viribus: while their strength was unimpaired' What is the construction ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"What do you think of the reply which Ariovistus made to Caesar***s envoys?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... potuerint: clause of result. H. 570; LM. 905; A. 319; G. 552; B. 284; (H. 500, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 42. *** Quod . . . existimaret: write this in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"How many subjunctives in this chapter are best rendered by the indicative ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Observe that Caesar is not describing any temporary expedient to impede the progress of his army, but the permanent hedges in the country of the Nervii. They were the result of years of growth and care."

"itaque prius quam quicquam conaretur, diviciacum ad se vocari iubet et, cotidianis interpretibus remotis, per c. valerium troucillum, principem galliae provinciae, familiarem suum, cui summam omnium rerum fidem habebat, CUM EO conloquitur;  simul commonefacit quae ipso praesente in concilio [gallorum] de dumnorige sint dicta, et ostendit quae separatim quisque de eo apud se dixerit."|"Cum eo agere: see note on the same, p. 78, 1. I."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. suffossis . ***. deiectis: stabbing our horses underneath, and dismounting many of our men."

"cum hic in duas partes flumine divideretur, alteram partem EIUS VICI gallis [ad hiemandum] concessit, alteram vacuam ab his relictam cohortibus attribuit."|"eius vici: i.e. of Octodurus."

"NOT FOUND"|"Strabo says that the Nervii were of German origin, and Appian that they were the descendants of the Cimbri and Teutones."

"eadem secreto ab aliis quaerit; REPERIT ESSE vera:  ipsum esse dumnorigem, summa audacia, magna apud plebem propter liberalitatem gratia, cupidum rerum novarum."|"reperit esse vera ... Dumnorigem: he finds it to be true that it was Dumnorix himselfsumma audacia: a man of the greatest daring. What kind of ablative is this? see incredib\li lenitate, p. 63, 1. 27."

"ITAQUE SE quod in longiorem diem conlaturus fuisset repraesentaturum et proxima nocte de quarta vigilia castra moturum, ut quam primum intellegere posset utrum apud eos pudor atque officium an timor plus valeret."|"Itaque se, etc.: write the rest of the chapter in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"idemque: to what does idem refer?"

"caesari cum id nuntiatum esset, eos per provinciam nostram iter facere conari, maturat AB URBE proficisci et quam maximis potest itineribus in galliam ulteriorem contendit et ad genavam pervenit."|"ab urbe: from (the neighborhood of) the city, i.e. Rome, the city to the Romans. Observe that Caesar was not in the city, but near it, as a Roman general holding a command could not remain in Rome."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque eo gravius ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  QUI SI alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed eo deceptum, quod neque commissum a se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"qui si . . . fuisset, non fuisse difficile: if they (the Roman people) had been conscious, etc., it would not have been difficult, conditional sentence of the third form with fuit in the conclusion in the direct discourse ; explain moods. H. 647, 3; A. 308, d, N.; (H. 527, n."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, PARTIM QUI, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, PARTIM QUI mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"9. partim qui ... partim qui: some of whom . .. others of whom. The clauses introduced by partim qui and partim qui explain non nullis Gallis,NOTES ***BOOK II, 1, 2and designate the two classes of Gauls who were urging on the Belgae. Here observe that Caesar has dropped the indirect discourse, and is now stating facts on his own authority; hence the indicatives, noluerant, ferebant, and studebant."

"qui cum propter SICCITATES PALUDUM quo se reciperent non haberent, quo perfugio superiore anno erant usi, omnes fere in potestatem labieni venerunt."|"siccitates paludum: the dryness of the marshes. The plural abstract siccitates is explained by the plural paludum. H. 138, 2; A. 75, c; G. 204, 5; (H. 130, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quid: construe with negotii."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo ... tolera**efif7>elative clause of characteristic, especially common after general negatives. H. 591; LM. 836; A. 320; G. 631, 2; B. 283; (H. 503, I)."

"QUAE RES et latus unum castrorum ripis fluminis muniebat et post eum quae erant tuta ab hostibus reddebat et commeatus ab remis reliquisque civitatibus ut sine periculo ad eum portari possent efficiebat."|"quae res: a movement which, or and this movement."

"rhenus autem oritur ex lepontiis, qui alpes incolunt, et LONGO SPATIO per fines nantuatium, helvetiorum, sequanorum, mediomatricorum, tribocorum, treverorum citatus fertur et,  ubi oceano adpropinquavit, in plures diffluit partes multis ingentibus insulis effectis, quarum pars magna a feris barbaris nationibus incolitur,  ex quibus sunt qui piscibus atque ovis avium vivere existimantur, multis capitibus in oceanum influit.]"|"longo spatio : in a long course; locative Ablative."

"NOT FOUND"|"SUOS, eos: SUOS refers to the subject of the clause, i.e. to the Allobroges; hence to avoid ambiguity a demonstrative, eos, must be used to refer to the subject of the principal clause, i.e. to the Helvetii."

"hac audita pugna maxima pars aquitaniae sese crasso dedidit obsidesque ultro misit; quo in numero fuerunt tarbelli, bigerriones, ptianii, vocates, tarusates, elusates, gates, ausci, garumni, sibusates, cocosates:  PAUCAE ULTIMAE nationes anni tempore confisae, quod hiems suberat, id facere neglexerunt."|"paucae ultimae nationes: a few of the most remote tribes; note the use of the two adjectives. H. 492, 15 (H. 440, 1)."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit UT NON mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"ut non iudicari deberet: so that we ought not to suppose."

"quorum de natura moribusque caesar cum quaereret, sic reperiebat:  nullum esse aditum ad eos mercatoribus; NIHIL PATI vini reliquarumque rerum ad luxuriam pertinentium inferri, quod his rebus relanguescere animos eorum et remitti virtutem existimarent;  esse homines feros magnaeque virtutis; increpitare atque incusare reliquos belgas, qui se populo romano dedidissent patriamque virtutem proiecissent;  confirmare sese neque legatos missuros neque ullam condicionem pacis accepturos."|"nihil pati vini: that they permit no wine, lit. nothing of wine. The subject of pati is readily supplied from ad eos."

"NOT FOUND"|"Examine carefully the indirect discourse contained in this chapter. Note the fact that all the verbs are either in the infinitive or in the subjunctive. Is this usual in indirect discourse?"

"NOT FOUND"|"frumenta: why plural? see frumenta in agris, with note, p. 67, L 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"egredi: note the infinitive with prohibebant; the usual construction in Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne . . . prohibeant, ut . ; . transeant: purpose clauses, showing theobject of exchanging hostages.	*itinere, like suis finibus, p. 55,1. 15."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK I, 24, 25Ea, eos: Ea refers to phalangem, and eos to the Helvetian soldiers who compose it."

"idem facit caesar equitatumque omnem, ad numerum quattuor milium, quem ex omni provincia et haeduis atque eorum sociis coactum habebat, praemittit, QUI VIDEANT quas in partes hostes iter faciant."|"qui videant: construction according to sense; the antecedent of qui is equitatum; videant, subjunctive of purpose."

"celeriter vineis ad oppidum actis, AGGERE IACTO turribusque constitutis, magnitudine operum, quae neque viderant ante galli neque audierant, et celeritate romanorum permoti legatos ad caesarem de deditione mittunt et petentibus remis ut conservarentur impetrant."|"aggere iacto : for the construction aiid use of the agger, see 120-124. The agger at Avaricum was 330 feet broad and 80 feet high. The length is not given, but it was probably 400 or 500 feet at least."

"tigna bina sesquipedalia paulum ab imo praeacuta DIMENSA AD altitudinem fluminis intervallo pedum duorum inter se iungebat."|"dimensa ad altitudinem, etc.: adapted to the depth of the river. The longest piles would, of course, be needed in the deepest water."

"NOT FOUND"|"quos: subject of coniectos, infinitive without esse."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui MOBILITATE ET levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"mobilitate, etc.: here, as elsewhere, Caesar refers to the fickle character of the Gauls; see IV, 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"naves quam plurimas possunt: as many vessels as possible."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. horis: ablative after the comparative amplius."

"QUIBUS REBUS adductus caesar non expectandum sibi statuit dum, omnibus fortunis sociorum consumptis, in santonos helvetii pervenirent."|"quibus rebus .. . putabat: these perils he thought ought to be met as soon as possible, lit. against which things there ought to be a running, etc. H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III; (H. 386)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut.. . possent: affirmative purpose; cf.ne . . . possent, above."

"NOT FOUND"|"Allobrogibusque: Caesar here makes special mention of the Allobroges, although they were included in the Province."

"NOT FOUND"|"ad Genavam: to Geneva, or, more exactly, to the vicinity of Geneva : ad with the names of cities usually has this force. Plutarch says that Caesar made this long journey in eight days."

"NOT FOUND"|"constituisset, voluisset: in the direct discourse these verbs would be in the future perfect. Hence, the pluperfect subjunctive. H.644,2; LM. 1031; A. 337. 3! G. 654; B. 319, a; (H. 525, 2)."

"ad multam noctem etiam ad impedimenta pugnatum est, propterea quod pro vallo carros obiecerunt et E LOCO superiore in nostros venientes tela coniciebant et non nulli inter carros rotasque mataras ac tragulas subiciebant nostrosque vulnerabant."|"e loco superiore: i.e. from the top of their baggage wagons."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF 10CAESAR***S GALLIC WARM. Messala, M. Pisone consulibus: in the consulship of M. Messala and M. Piso, ablative absolute. This was in the year 6i B.C., three years before Caesar***s arrival in Gaul. The year of any given event in Roman history is regularly thus designated by putting the names of the consuls then in office in the ablative absolute with consulibus. The consuls Were joint presidents of the Roman commonwealth; they were two in number and held office fon one year."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 118, line 3, Chapter 26. *** ut... inferrent: that the legions should gradually unite, and, facing about, should advance against the enemy; substantive clause depending on monuit as a cognate accusative or object. The two legions, when united, may have been placed back to back, or they may have formed a hollow square or rectangle; legiones, i.e. the 12th and the 7th."

"nam cum omnis iuventus, omnes etiam gravioris aetatis in quibus aliquid consilii aut dignitatis fuit eo convenerant, tum NAVIUM QUOD ubique fuerat in unum locum coegerant;  quibus amissis reliqui neque quo se reciperent neque quem ad modum oppida defenderent habebant."|"navium quod ubique fuerat: whatever vessels they had anywhere; navium, partitive genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduos . .. faceret: write these sentences in the forms of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"quicumque . . . obtineret: whoever should hold Gaul as his province."

"NOT FOUND"|"ubi . . . vidit: where he saw. Here begins the description of the scene of confusion and ruin which met the eye of Caesar when he reached the right wing."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUId vellent, ad id."|"si qui: for the more usual si quis."

"NOT FOUND"|"Which of the subjunctives in this chapter are best rendered by the indicative? Which by the infinitive?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Unum: one favor, viz. ne se armis despoliaret."

"qui ubi pro perfuga ad eos venit, timorem romanorum proponit, quibus angustiis ipse caesar a venetis prematur docet,  NEQUE LONGIUS abesse quin proxima nocte sabinus clam ex castris exercitum educat et ad caesarem auxilii ferendi causa proficiscatur."|"neque longius . ***. potuerunt: but were not able to pursue them very far, or farther."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAPage 137, line 2, Chapter 17.***quas . . . acceperat: see chapter 11."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. Dumnorigi custodes ponit: Caesar watches the movements of Dumnorix, and finally puts him to death; see B. v. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 3. *** Publice : for the state."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibus: to these, i.e. to the Boii. Illi refers to the Haedui."

"NOT FOUND"|"ab Germanis: why is ab used? H. 469, 1; LM. 609; A. 244, r.; G. 395; B. 215, 2; (H. 415, II, n.)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Who was Orgetorix? What proposition did he make to the Helvetii? Why did they so readily listen to him ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"prince'ps . . . persolvit: was the first to pay the penalty. Observe that poenas persolvere corresponds exactly to the English to pay a penalty. The primary conception is not that of suffering punishment, but of paying a fine or forfeit. On princeps see H. 497, 3; A. 191; G. 325; B. 241, 2; (H. 443, N. 1)."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod EO CONSILIO florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"eo consilio: with this purpose, ablative of cause. The final clauses that follow in this chapter, ut expugnarent, etc., are all in apposition with consilio; see uti . . . faciant, p. 100,1. 3."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 82, line 1. *** Quoniam ... inferret: Direct as follows:Quoniam tanto meo populique Romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatuOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAmeo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus sit, hanc mihi populoque Romano gratiam refert, ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravetur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putet, haec sunt quae ab eo postulo: primum, ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans Rhenum in Galliam traducat; deinde obsides quos habeat ab Haeduis reddat Sequanisque permittat ut quos illi habeant voluntate eius reddere illis liceat; neve Haeduos iniuria lacessat, neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferat."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quarum ... summa erat capitum .. . CCLXIII: the sum of all these items was two hundred and sixty-three thousand Helvetii, lit. of heads of the Helvetii. The use of capita is common in the Ronujn census."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. Veneticum bellum: see p. 130,11. 1-8."

"eo de media nocte caesar isdem ducibus usus qui nuntii ab iccio venerant, numidas et cretas sagittarios et funditores baleares subsidio oppidanis mittit;  quorum adventu et remis cum spe defensionis STUDIUM PROPUGNANDI accessit et hostibus eadem de causa spes potiundi oppidi discessit."|"studium propugnandi: eagerness for the battle, lit. desire of fighting."

"haec utraque insuper bipedalibus trabibus immissis, quantum eorum tignorum iunctura distabat, binis utrimque fibulis ab extrema parte distinebantur;  QUIBUS DISCLUSIS atque in contrariam partem revinctis, tanta erat operis firmitudo atque ea rerum natura ut, quo maior vis aquae se incitavisset, hoc artius inligata tenerentur."|"quibus disclusis . . . revinctis: as these (i.e. the two opposite pairs of piles) 7vere kept apart, and also secured in the opposite direction : quibus disclusis relates to what has already been described in haec utraque distinebantur. The two pairs of piles, inclining toward each other, were prevented from inclining too far by the cross pieces or fibulae, inserted in the two acute angles which the large connecting beam made with those piles. The action implied by in contrariam partem revinctis has not been described, but it may mean simply that, while the two pairs of piles are kept apart by the fibulae, they are yet inseparably bound together by the large connecting beams, and by the whole structure and weight of the bridge."

"NOT FOUND"|"humanitate: culture,civitate donatus erat: this was done by Gaius Valerius Flaccus, when he was governor of Gaul, 83 B.C. In accordance with Roman custom, the Gaul, Caburus, thus became Gaius Valerius Caburus, taking the name Gaius Valerius from Flaccus."

"denique hos esse eosdem germanos quibuscum saepe numero helvetii congressi non solum in suis sed etiam in illorum finibus plerumque superarint, QUI TAMEN pares esse nostro exercitui non potuerint."|"qui tamen: and yet they, i.e. the Helvetii."

"id hoc facilius iis persuasit, quod undique loci natura helvetii continentur: UNA EX parte flumine rheno latissimo atque altissimo, qui agrum helvetium a germanis dividit; altera ex parte monte iura altissimo, qui est inter sequanos et helvetios; tertia lacu lemanno et flumine rhodano, qui provinciam nostram ab helvetiis dividit."|"una ex parte: on one side; see note on ab Sequanis, p. 56,1. I. Observegitized by GoogleNOTES***BOOK I, 2, 3ftthe series, una ex parte ... altera ex parte ... tertia (ex parte); altera = secunda. Alter is often thus used for secundus."

"NOT FOUND"|"In this passage the changes from the direct to the indirect discourse are fewer than usual. Intellegimus becomes intellegere sese, the infinitive with the subject sese expressed; repetisti becomes repetisset; reliquerunt becomes reliquissent. H. 643; LM. 1026; A. 336, 2; G. 650; B. 314, 1; (H. 524)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 27. *** quo in numero: in this number, referring to maxima pars Aquitaniae."

"eadem secreto ab aliis quaerit; reperit esse vera:  ipsum esse dumnorigem, summa audacia, magna apud plebem propter liberalitatem gratia, cupidum RERUM NOVARUM."|"rerum novarum: of a revolution, objective genitive. H. 451, 1; LM. 573; A. 218, a; G. 374; B. 204, 1; (H. 399, I, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"imperat: the direct object is quas ... nuntiet; the indirect Huic."

"hunc illi e navi egressum, cum ad eos ORATORIS MODO caesaris mandata deferret, comprehenderant atque in vincula coniecerant;  tum proelio facto remiserunt et in petenda pace eius rei culpam in multitudinem contulerunt et propter imprudentiam ut ignosceretur petiverunt."|"oratoris modo: in the character of an envoy."

"NOT FOUND"|"11. Labienus castris hostium potitus : Labienus in command of the 9th and 10th legions, having driven the Atrebates across the river (p. 116,1. 2), had captured the enemy***s camp on the other side."

"genus hoc erat pugnae, QUO SE germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, totidem numero pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, quos ex omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas ut iubis sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"4. quo se . *** *** non haberent: had no place to which (had not whither) they could retreat."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. genere: H. 469, 2; LM. 609; A. 244, a; G. 395; B. 215; (H.415, II)."

"horum primo circiter milia xv rhenum transisse; postea quam agros et cultum et copias gallorum homines feri ac barbari adamassent, traductos plures; NUNC ESSE in gallia ad c et xx milium numerum."|"16. nunc esse .. . numerum: now there are about one hundred and twenty thousand of them in Gaul."

"hostes, ubi et DE EXPUGNANDO oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse intellexerunt neque nostros in locum iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa viderunt atque ipsos res frumentaria deficere coepit, concilio convocato constituerunt optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti, et quorum in fines primum romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur."|"de expugnando oppido spem se fefellisse: that they were disappointed in their hope of taking the town, lit. that the hope of (in regard to) the town to be taken had failed them."

"NOT FOUND"|"Populi Romani, etc.: Direct discourse:Populi Romani haec est consuetudo, ut socios atque amicos non modo sui nihil deperdere, sed gratia, dignitate, honore auctiores velit esse; quod vero ad amicitiam populi Romani attulerunt, id iis eripi quis pati possit?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Quibusnam . . . confiderent: why subjunctive? H. 642; LM. 1023; A. 338; G. 651; B. 315; (H. 523, II, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What demand did Caesar make of the vanquished Helvetii?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 71, line I. *** qui cognoscerent misit: he sent men to ascertain. The antecedent of qui is readily supplied."

"NOT FOUND"|"quae: such as; lit. which."

"erant omnino itinera duo, quibus itineribus domo exire possent: unum per sequanos, angustum et difficile, inter montem iuram et flumen rhodanum, VIX QUA singuli carri ducerentur, mons autem altissimus impendebat, ut facile perpauci prohibere possent;   alterum per provinciam nostram, multo facilius atque expeditius, propterea quod inter fines helvetiorum et allobrogum, qui nuper pacati erant, rhodanus fluit isque non nullis locis vado transitur."|"vix qua . . . ducerentur: (ryer which carts could be with dijfiailty drawn even in single file. Another relative clause of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ... pugnaretur: when the battle had been going on, etc.; see cum ... pugnaretur, p. 128,1. 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"se . . . daturas . . . facturas: this is the promise sent by the tribes through their representatives; hence the feminine forms daturas, facturas;se refers not to qui, but to nationibus, the real agents of the action mitterentur. H. 503, 2; A. 196, c\ G. 309, 2; (H. 449, 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"commodis: ablative with fruantur. An ancient writer says that the soldurii were clad in royal garments, like their chief."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne . . . confligendum sit: impersonal periphrastic construction, that they might not have to contend; purpose of distineri. H. 568; LM. 899;317, 1; G. 545; B. 282; (H. 497, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Celtae, Galli: predicate nominatives. Observe that the term Galli, like Gallia, is used in two senses. It usually denotes the inhabitants of Gaul as a whole, but it is often used, as in this instance, to designate the inhabitants of one division of the country, i.e. of Celtic Gaul. This distinction must be constantly borne in mind."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut omnes suspiciones vitet: to avoid all suspicious conduct; subjunctive in an object clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"neque aut ipsius ... aut Labieni: nor had either his arrival or that of Labienus ; note the omission of the governing word with Labieni."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduos: subject of teneri."

"NOT FOUND"|"Who were the Remi? Why did the Belgae attack their town?"

"NOT FOUND"|"BOOK SECONDCampaign of the Year 57 b.c."

"ipse interim in colle medio triplicem aciem instruxit legionum quattuor veteranarum; in summo iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque IN UNUM locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"in unum locum: notice that conferri is treated as a verb of motion, and so takes in with the accusative."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . attulissent: which they had indeed brought to the friendship of the Roman people, i.e. which they possessed when they became their friends."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARetiam in extrema spe salutis: even though with only a forlorn hope of safety."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 109, line 2. *** et petentibus . . . impetrant: and obtain their request, as the Remi ask that they may be spared."

"NOT FOUND"|"His: the indirect object of mandavit. The clause, ut. ***. cognoscerent ... referent, is the direct object."

"his rebus fiebat ut et MINUS LATE vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte homines bellandi cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"minus late: less extensively, i.e. than they wished."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hi, eorum: Hi, these, the six thousand; eorum, of those, the Cimbri and Teutoni."

"DUM EA conquiruntur et conferuntur, [nocte intermissa] circiter hominum milia vi eius pagi qui verbigenus appellatur, sive timore perterriti, ne armis traditis supplicio adficerentur, sive spe salutis inducti, quod in tanta multitudine dediticiorum suam fugam aut occultari aut omnino ignorari posse existimarent, prima nocte e castris helvetiorum egressi ad rhenum finesque germanorum contenderunt."|"Dum ea conquiruntur: Dum, while, is regularly followed by the historical present, generally best rendered by the English imperfect; ea, these, lit. these things. The use of the neuter, referring to obsides and servos, shows that they were regarded as the spoils of victory, rather than as men."

"ita ancipiti proelio diu atque ACRITER PUGNATUM est."|"Acriter . . . pugnatum est: impersonal; there was brave fighting, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. congrederetur: he might come on, a volitive subjunctive in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 44.***de *** . . multa praedicavit: he boasted much of etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ita .. . itaque (= et ita) : construe the first ita with acriter,, and the second with repente celeriterque."

"cum ex captivis quaereret caesar quam ob rem ariovistus proelio non decertaret, hanc reperiebat causam, quod apud germanos EA CONSUETUDO esset ut matres familiae eorum sortibus et vaticinationibus declararent utrum proelium committi ex usu esset necne; eas ita dicere:  non esse fas germanos superare, si ante novam lunam proelio contendissent."|"ea consuetudo: explained by the result clause, ut.. . declararent, with the potential subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 63, line 3. *** Compluribus his proeliis pulsis: having routed these in several encounters, lit. these having been routed, etc. Note the unusual order; join Compluribus with proeliis and pulsis with his."

"NOT FOUND"|"adversis . . . occurrebant: met the enemy face to face. The Roman cavalry found the enemy in the Roman camp**igitized by GoogleN91ab decumana ... iugo: construe with conspexerant. The rear of the camp, where the decuman gate was situated, occupied the summit of the hill; see plan of camp, 94."

"NOT FOUND"|"dixeramus: / (we) had said\ i.e. in the first chapter of the first book."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. Chapter 12. *** Flumen est Arar: there is a river called* A rar, now the Saone."

"NOT FOUND"|"Eorum: note position, referring back to Ambianorum. H. 669, 1; LM. 1151; A. 344; G. 672, 2; B. 350, 9; (H. 561, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"raris *** . *** portibus: with few and almost no harbors."

"NOT FOUND"|"424; LM. 533; A. 226; G. 346; B. 187; (H. 385)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quique: and those who. Observe that que in qui-que connects, not qui, but its implied antecedent back to mulieres."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. quid . . . vererentur: compare cur . . . iudicaret', 1. 17."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 151, line 2. *** ex quibus sunt qui : of these there are some who."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod: which, referring to the general idea contained in dies . *** *** decreta est. H. 399, 6; LM. 830; A. 200, et N.; G. 614, r. 2; B. 247, 1, b; (H. 445, 7)."

"QUAE RES et latus unum castrorum ripis fluminis muniebat et post eum quae erant tuta ab hostibus reddebat et commeatus ab remis reliquisque civitatibus ut sine periculo ad eum portari possent efficiebat."|"Quae res: this position, lit. which thing."

"NOT FOUND"|"iis: depending on imperarent, whose subject is the implied antecedent of qui."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. qui . . . prohibuerint: for tense, see ut . . . potuerint, p. 101,1. 12; for mood, H. 591, 5; LM. 838; A. 320, b\ G. 631, 1; B. 283, 2; (H. 503, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 3.***quae ad proficiscendum pertinerent : which (they thought) would be requisite for their departure. H. 652; LM. 793; A. 342;628; B. 324, 2; (H. 529, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What historical facts have you learned from this chapter?"

"NOT FOUND"|"tuta: predicate accusative, agreeing with the implied antecedent of quae."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallicum cum Germanorum agro : the Gallic land (soil) with the German. This is another good illustration of the fact that adjectives and the genitives of nouns are kindred forms, which are often interchanged; see also sua omni- umque salute, p. 78, 1. I, and auctoritate sua atque exercitus, p. 79, 1. 29."

"nam etsi sine ullo PERICULO LEGIONIS delectae cum equitatu proelium fore videbat, tamen committendum non putabat ut, pulsis hostibus, dici posset eos ab se per fidem in conloquio circumventos."|"periculo legionis delectae: danger to his chosen legion, i.e. the tenth, serving on this occasion as cavalry; legionis, objective genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 27. *** quae imperasset: whatever he would command."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was Caesar***s situation at the beginning of this chapter? What two facts were of special service to him in this emergency?"

"NOT FOUND"|"militi: depending on detracto, which agrees with scuto. H. 429; LM. 534; A. 229; G. 345, R. I; B. 188, d; (H. 386)."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . . . patebant: this clause takes the indicative because it is the independent statement of Caesar, and not the thought of the Helvetii."

"genus hoc erat pugnae, quo se germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, TOTIDEM NUMERO pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, quos ex omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas ut iubis sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"totidem numero pedites: the same number of infantry; numero, ablative of specification."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem IMPERIO NOSTRO consequi poterant."|"imperio nostro: under our rule ; ablative of time and cause."

"adiuvabat etiam eorum consilium qui rem deferebant quod nervii antiquitus, cum equitatu nihil possent (neque enim ad hoc tempus EI REI student, sed quicquid possunt, pedestribus valent copiis), quo facilius finitimorum equitatum, si praedandi causa ad eos venissent, impedirent, teneris arboribus incisis atque inflexis crebrisque in latitudinem ramis enatis [et] rubis sentibusque interiectis effecerant ut instar muri hae saepes munimentum praeberent, quo non modo non intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset."|"ei rei: i.e. the capture of their vessels."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWAPages 79, 80]	NOTES	*** BOOK I, 31, 32	N45nobilissimi cuiusque: of all the highest nobility. H. 515, 2; LM. 1069; A. 93, c; G. 318, 2; B. 252, 5; (H. 458, 1)."

"capto monte et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et novissimis praesidio erant, ex itinere nostros AB LATERE aperto adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"ab latere aperto: on the exposed flank. This expression generally denotes the right side, as not protected by the shield, but it is often used of either flank of the army when particularly exposed."

"ita ANCIPITI PROELIO diu atque acriter pugnatum est."|"23.	ancipiti	proelio:	in	a	double battle, so called becausefought on two different fronts: proelio, ablative of manner."

"NOT FOUND"|"si intulisset: a condition of the first form with the future perfect in the direct form. Explain mood and tense here.Pages 85, 86]	NOTES	***BOOK I, 39, 40amentia: amentia denotes a want of reason, as in an idiot; dementia, a perversion of reason, as in a madman."

"NOT FOUND"|"longissime absint: are very remote, i.e. far removed from the refining influence of Southern Gaul; hence maxime feri."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. in Aquitaniam: i.e. into the southwestern part of Gaul. Notice that Caesar***s object is to prevent any concert of action on the part of the three great divisions of Gaul: see Map."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 120, line 2.***pedum: construe with aditus."

"NOT FOUND"|"Socios: predicate accusative."

"namque omnium rerum quae ad bellum usui erant summa erat in eo oppido facultas,   idque natura loci sic muniebatur ut magnam ad ducendum bellum daret facultatem, propterea quod flumen [alduas] dubis ut circino circumductum paene totum oppidum cingit,  reliquum spatium, quod est non amplius pedum mdc, QUA FLUMEN intermittit, mons continet magna altitudine, ita ut radices eius montis ex utraque parte ripae fluminis contingant,  hunc murus circumdatus arcem efficit et cum oppido coniungit."|"qua flumen intermittit: where the course of the river is obstructed. The river continues its course round the city until interrupted by the high hill which stood on one side of the town."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 50. *** instituto suo: in accordance with his custom ; ablative of cause."

"NISI QUID in caesare populoque romano sit auxilii, omnibus gallis idem esse faciendum quod helvetii fecerint, ut domo emigrent, aliud domicilium, alias sedes, remotas a germanis, petant fortunamque, quaecumque accidat, experiantur."|"Nisi quid: see note on ne quid gravius, p. 70, 1. 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"BOOK FOURTHCampaign of the Year 55 b.c.***Expedition into Germany, 1-19Page 145, line 1, Chapter i.***hieme: construe with transierunt qui fuit . . . consulibus: in the year of the consulship, etc., lit. which was, etc.; qui, why not quae? see quod est oppidum, p. 83,1. 25."

"NOT FOUND"|"subito . . . exstitit: this was probably no unusual occurrence. In thatcountry at the present day we often meet with calms in the afternoon of a summer***s day."

"NOT FOUND"|"N 117neque verum esse: and that it was not just."

"illi ante inito, ut intellectum est, consilio, quod deditione facta nostros praesidia deducturos aut denique indiligentius servaturos crediderant, partim cum iis quae retinuerant et celaverant armis, partim SCUTIS EX cortice factis aut viminibus intextis, quae subito, ut temporis exiguitas postulabat, pellibus induxerant, tertia vigilia, qua minime arduus ad nostras munitiones ascensus videbatur, omnibus copiis repente ex oppido eruptionem fecerunt."|"scutis ex . *** . intextis: with shields made of bark or of intertwined osiers."

"NOT FOUND"|"impeditos . . . cogitabant: they intended to attack them incumbered on the march and dispirited under their packs; sub sarcinis : see note on impedimentorum, p. hi, 1. 13. animo, ablative of specification."

"NOT FOUND"|"calones . . . occurrerent, equites . . . praeferrent: result clauses."

"renuntiatum est FACILEM ESSE."|"facilem esse = ascensum facilem esse,3. De tertia vigilia: see note on the same, p. 64,1. 6."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos AD EUM mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"ad eum: to him, i.e. to Caesar."

"non respuit condicionem caesar iamque eum ad sanitatem reverti arbitrabatur, cum id quod antea petenti denegasset ultro polliceretur,   magnamque in spem veniebat pro suis tantis populique romani in eum beneficiis cognitis suis postulatis FORE UTI pertinacia desisteret."|"fore uti . . . desisteret: that he would cease from his obstinacy; s**e futurum uti . . . averterentur, p. 70, 1. 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 152, line 1. *** his: these, i.e. our men."

"NOT FOUND"|"Oppresserunt: surprised or overwhelmed."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 142, line I. *** Obsessis . . . potiri: by guarding the roads and cutting off supplies to gain victory without a wound."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK III, 7-910. ut sunt . . . consilia, as the plans of the Gauls are hasty and rash."

"QUI CUM eum in itinere convenissent seque ad pedes proiecissent suppliciterque locuti flentes pacem petissent, atque eos in eo loco quo tum essent suum adventum expectare iussisset, paruerunt."|"Qui, cum cognovissent: they (i.e. the soldiers of the 10th legion) when they had ascertained. Qui refers to legionem which is in the feminine singular, while Qui is in the masculine plural. H. 397; LM. 484; A. 199, b\ G. 614, R. 3; B. 250, 4; (H. 445, 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"In this speech, as indeed in all indirect discourse, the student should observe especially the use of moods *** the infinitive in principal clauses, unless interrogative or imperative, and the subjunctive in subordinate clauses. But he should remember that the subjunctive in a subordinate clause, which would require that mood in the direct discourse, should be referred to the rule which would govern it in the direct discourse. Thus enuntiarentur and impetrarent, in the sentence, Non minus ... viderent, 1. 4, are both subjunctives of purpose, in the direct as well as in the indirect form, and should be so treated."

"NOT FOUND"|"imperium: supreme power, command, as of an army."

"NOT FOUND"|"32. decedat, habiturum: these verbs both represent the future indicative of the direct discourse."

"haec si enuntiata ariovisto sint, non DUBITARE QUIN de omnibus obsidibus qui apud eum sint gravissimum supplicium sumat."|"dubitare ... quin . . . sint erepturi: see note on dubium quin, etc., p. 58,1. 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"accessisset: future perfect in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"circiter: about; adverb."

"NOT FOUND"|"fugitivos L. Aemilii: the fugitive slaves of Lucius Aemilius."

"NOT FOUND"|"lacte: ablative of means."

"si iterum experiri velint, se iterum paratum esse decertare; si pace uti velint, iniquum esse DE STIPENDIO recusare, quod sua voluntate ad id tempus pependerint."|"de stipendio recusare: to refuse to pay the tribute, lit. to raise objection in regard to it."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod . . . dicantur: as to the statement that they (the soldiers) wouldnot, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 129, line 1.***circumventos interficiunt: they surround and slay ; see copias . .. eductas instruxerunt, p. 106,1. 9."

"prima luce, cum summus mons a [lucio] labieno teneretur, ipse ab hostium castris non longius mille et quingentis passibus abesset neque, ut postea ex captivis comperit, aut ipsius adventus aut labieni cognitus esset,   considius equo admisso ad eum accurrit, dicit montem, quem a labieno occupari voluerit, ab hostibus teneri: ID SE a gallicis armis atque insignibus cognovisse."|"id se .. . compertum habere: that he had ascertained this, etc. Note the expression compertum habere."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. Chapter 29. *** supra diximus : see p. hi, 1. 2."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui AD CONDUCENDOS homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"13. ad conducendos homines: for hiring men, i.e. mercenary soldiers; a gerundive construction; see ad effeminandos animos, p. 55, 1. 10. H. 628; LM. 995; A. 300; G. 432, R.; B. 339, 2; (H. 544, I)."

"ex eo proelio circiter hominum milia cxxx superfuerunt eaque tota nocte continenter ierunt [NULLAM PARTEM noctis itinere intermisso]; in fines lingonum die quarto pervenerunt, cum et propter vulnera militum et propter sepulturam occisorum nostri [triduum morati] eos sequi non potuissent."|"nullam partem: accusative, duration of time."

"NOT FOUND"|"appetierit: explain subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"suae .. . dignitatis esse: to be consistent with his own dignity or that of the Roman people."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 68, line I. *** quaeque . . . gerantur: and whatever is done in the camp.	***a se: by himself i.e. in his capacity as chief magistrate."

"NOT FOUND"|"Pro: in proportion to, or simply for\angustos: too narrow. qui: the antecedent is fines."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut... revertatur: object of mandat."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . praemitteret: to send word; substantive clause, object of petebant."

"quod si eum interfecerit, multis sese nobilibus principibusque populi romani gratum esse facturum (id se ab ipsis PER EORUM nuntios compertum habere), quorum omnium gratiam atque amicitiam eius morte redimere posset."|"per eorum corpora : over their dead bodies."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 149, line 1, Chapter 6. *** ne graviori . . . occurreret: that he might not encounter a more formidable war. Caesar feared that the Gauls would unite with the Germans."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 88, line 1. *** cum: construe with polliceretur, petenti: when he (Caesar) asked it, in contrast with ultro."

"itaque PRIUS QUAM quicquam conaretur, diviciacum ad se vocari iubet et, cotidianis interpretibus remotis, per c. valerium troucillum, principem galliae provinciae, familiarem suum, cui summam omnium rerum fidem habebat, cum eo conloquitur;  simul commonefacit quae ipso praesente in concilio [gallorum] de dumnorige sint dicta, et ostendit quae separatim quisque de eo apud se dixerit."|"prius . . . quam . . . videri: before they could be seen ; videri depends upon possent, to be supplied from posset."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with Caesar."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hominem: construe as the predicate after esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui: but they."

"NOT FOUND"|"eo: referring to Diviciacus, simul ... et: at once . . . and."

"nostri ad unum omnes incolumes, perpaucis vulneratis, EX TANTI belli timore, cum hostium numerus capitum ccccxxx milium fuisset, se in castra receperunt."|"ex tanti .. *** timore: after the alarm of so great a war."

"NOT FOUND"|"flumine: the Rhone, or its tributary, the Drance."

"postridie eius diei, quod omnino biduum supererat, cum exercitui frumentum metiri oporteret, ET QUOD a bibracte, oppido haeduorum longe maximo et copiosissimo, non amplius milibus passuum xviii aberat, rei frumentariae prospiciendum existimavit; itaque iter ab helvetiis avertit ac bibracte ire contendit."|"et quod . . . vetuerat: and because he had forbidden his several lieutenants to depart from the work and their respective legions until (lit. unless) the camp 7vas fortified, the second of the two advantages."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 10. *** certior factus: having been informed, i.e. of this movement of the enemy."

"coniurandi has esse causas: PRIMUM QUOD vererentur ne, omni pacata gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"25. primum, quod ... despiciebant: this is the first reason assigned for the movement of the Gauls. Who assigns this reason?"

"haec cum pluribus verbis flens a caesare peteret, caesar eius dextram prendit; consolatus rogat finem orandi faciat; tanti eius apud se gratiam esse ostendit uti et REI PUBLICAE iniuriam et suum dolorem eius voluntati ac precibus condonet."|"rei publicae . . . condonet: in accordance with his (Diviciacus***s) wish he (Caesar) pardons the wrong done to the republic, etc., lit. he makes a present of the wrong, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 30. *** principes: subject of duxerunt,!. 13, below."

"c. ivli caesaris commentariorvm de bello gallico liber secvndvs cum esset caesar in citeriore gallia [in hibernis], ITA UTI supra demonstravimus, crebri ad eum rumores adferebantur litterisque item labieni certior fiebat omnes belgas, quam tertiam esse galliae partem dixeramus, contra populum romanum coniurare obsidesque inter se dare."|"Ita ... uti: see ita . . . uti, 1. 6."

"proximo die instituto suo caesar EX CASTRIS utrisque copias suas eduxit paulumque a maioribus castris progressus aciem instruxit hostibusque pugnandi potestatem fecit."|"ex castris: i.e. of Caesar."

"divico respondit: ita helvetios a maioribus suis institutos esse uti obsides accipere, non dare, consuerint; EIUS REI populum romanum esse testem."|"eius rei . . . testem: that the Roman people was a witness of that fact, alluding to the hostages given by the survivors after the defeat and death of Cassius."

"quod si veteris contumeliae oblivisci vellet, num etiam recentium iniuriarum, quod EO INVITO iter per provinciam per vim temptassent, quod haeduos, quod ambarros, quod allobrogas vexassent, memoriam deponere posse?"|"eo invito: without his (or their) consent; eo may refer either to Caesar or to the Roman people."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. civitates: Gaul comprised a large number of petty states or clans."

"ariovistus EX EQUIS ut conloquerentur et praeter se denos ad conloquium adducerent postulavit."|"ex equis ut . . . adducerent : object clause of purpose, depending on postulavit'. Note emphatic position of ex equis."

"caesar primo et propter multitudinem hostium et propter eximiam opinionem virtutis PROELIO SUPERSEDERE statuit;  cotidie tamen equestribus proeliis quid hostis virtute posset et quid nostri auderent periclitabatur."|"proelio supersedere: to refrain from battle; see defensoribus nudatus, p. 103,1. 24. H. 462; LM. 600; A. 243, a; G. 405; B. 214, 1; (H. 414,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . resisterent: causal clause. For the position of the severallegions, see plate XIII."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. Britanniae: this is the earliest mention of Britain by a Roman writer."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK I, 32-34Page 81, line 1. *** quod: and this state of affairs, referring ta the facts just mentioned. The antecedent of quod is the clause quod Haeduos . . . teneri ... intellegebat."

"ab iis qui emerant capitum numerus ad eum RELATUS EST milium liii."|"relatus est milium quinquaginta trium: was reported to be fifty-three thousand; predicate genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"nobilitatis: of the nobles, lit. of the nobility."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by boogieN 16possent: explain subjunctive; see cum .. . praestarent', p. 57, 1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 168, line 3, Chapter 38. *** Qui cum: since they, i.e. the Morini."

"caesari omnia uno tempore erant agenda: vexillum proponendum, quod erat insigne, cum ad arma concurri oporteret; signum tuba dandum; ab opere revocandi milites; qui paulo longius aggeris petendi causa processerant arcessendi; acies instruenda; milites cohortandi; SIGNUM DANDUM."|"16. signum dandum: the signal for battle was to be given. In line 13 signum tuba dandum refers to the signal to prepare for battle. The signal for the onset, the classicum, was given by the united blasts of the horn and the trumpet; see 106."

"NOT FOUND"|"quos ... dixeram: see p. 114,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipse: refers to Caesar, and civitatem to tho Haedui."

"NOT FOUND"|"faciat: subjunctive without ut. H. 565, 4; LM. 781; A. 331,/, R.;546, R. 2; B. 295, 8; (H. 499, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"est divisa: is divided\ not has been divided. H. 640, 3; LM. 1012; A. 291, b; G. 250, R. 2; (H. 550, N. 2)."

"allobrogibus sese vel persuasuros, quod nondum bono animo in populum romanum viderentur, existimabant vel vi coacturos ut PER SUOS fines eos ire paterentur."|"13. per suos principes : through the influence of their leading men,16. ut... malint: purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum: construe with vidissent."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo . .. possent: that they might more easily encounter, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"classi: indirect object of praeficit; see also 126, 127."

"NOT FOUND"|"pedum XII: twelve feet in height,XV milium: it is uncertain whether passuum, the usual word in such cases, should be here supplied, or pedum from pedum XII just before it."

"NOT FOUND"|"Name any interesting constructions or expressions which you have noticed in the last two chapters."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. ne . . . pugnae: no opportunity for an engagement."

"hic primum ortus est a tribunis militum, praefectis, reliquisque qui ex urbe amicitiae causa caesarem secuti non magnum in re militari usum habebant:  quorum alius alia causa inlata, QUAM SIBI ad proficiscendum necessariam esse diceret, petebat ut eius voluntate discedere liceret; non nulli pudore adducti, ut timoris suspicionem vitarent, remanebant."|"quam sibi . . . diceret: which he said necessitated his departure, lit. was necessary for him to depart (for departing); diceret; H. 588,1; LM. 851; A. 341, d, R.; G. 626, R.; B. 286, 1, a; (H. 516, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"utantur: subjunctive dependent on deterrere potuerint. H. 652; i-M* 793; A. 342; G. 663, 1; B. 324; (H. 529, II).NOTES ***BOOK II, 2-415. cum ipsis: with themselves, i.e. with the Remi."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate ID SIbi facere liceat."|"Id si fieret: if this should be done, subordinate clause in indirect discourse; direct, id si fiet; see propterea . . . obtenturus esset, p. 58,1. II. To what does Id refer ? Note its emphatic position."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . iussisset: this temporal clause marks the time of fore and laturos, not of nuntiabant; iussisset represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"nihil: not at all; adverbial accusative."

"eorum una pars, quam gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine rhodano, continetur garumna flumine, oceano, finibus belgarum, attingit etiam ab sequanis et helvetiis flumen rhenum, vergit AD SEPTENTRIONES."|"** ad septentriones vergit: lies toward the northt i.e. in relation to the Roman province; in other words, is situated in high northern latitude."

"NOT FOUND"|"conlocari, compleri: construe with iussit."

"NOT FOUND"|"Lingonas: the common Greek form in as is found in the accusative of the names of many Gallic tribes."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 19. *** omnibus copiis: see omnibus copiis, p. 104,1. 12."

"his rebus fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  QUA EX parte homines bellandi cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"qua ex parte: from this fact, lit. from this part."

"itaque se quod in longiorem diem conlaturus fuisset repraesentaturum et proxima nocte de quarta vigilia castra moturum, ut quam primum intellegere posset utrum APUD EOS pudor atque officium an timor plus valeret."|"10. Apud eos fuisse, etc.: indirect discourse. Direct as follows:Apud eos fuit rex nostra etiam memoria Diviciacus, totius Galliae potentis- simus, qui cum magnae partis harum regionum, tum etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuit; nunc est rex Galba; ad hunc propter iustitiam prudentiamque summa totius belli omnium voluntate defertur; oppida habent numero XII, pollicentur milia armata quinquaginta; totidem Nervii, qui maxime feri inter ipsos habentur longissimeque absunt; quindecim milia Atrebates, Ambiani decem milia, Morini xxv milia, Menapii vii milia, Caleti x milia, Veliocasses et Viromandui totidem, Aduatuci decem et novem milia; Condrusos, Eburones, Caerosos, Caemanos, qui uno nomine Germani appellantur, arbitramur posse conficere ad XL milia."

"NOT FOUND"|"23. Chapter 49. *** ultra eum locum: the student will bear in mind the recent movements of the two armies. At the beginning of chapter 48 they were within six miles of each other. Ariovistus then passed the camp of Caesar, and took up a position in his rear. Caesar now retraces his steps, and secures a position for a second camp, to prevent the enemy from cutting ofl his supplies,CAESAR***S GALLIC WARcastris: depends on idoneum. H. 434; LM. 536; A. 234; G. 359; B. 192, 2; (H. 391, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 104, line 1. *** unus ex its ... de pace: see p. 101,1. 3. H. 444, 1; LM. 563; A. 216, c; G. 372, r. 2; B. 201, 1, a; (H. 397, N. 3)."

"QUOD FRATRES a senatu haeduos appellatos diceret, non se tam barbarum neque tam imperitum esse rerum ut non sciret neque bello allobrogum proximo haeduos romanis auxilium tulisse neque ipsos in iis contentionibus quas haedui secum et cum sequanis habuissent auxilio populi romani usos esse."|"Quod fratres .. . pro hoste habiturum: Direct discourse:Quod fratres a senatu Haeduos appellatos dicis, non tam barbarus neque tam imperitus sum rerum ut non sciam neque bello Allobrogum proximo Haeduos Romanis auxilium tulisse neque ipsos in his contentionibus quas Haedui mecum et cum Sequanis habuerunt (habuerint), auxilio populi Romani usos esse. Debeo suspicari simulata te amicitia quem exercitum in Gallia habes mei opprimendi causa habere. Tu nisi decedes atque exercitum deduces ex his regionibus, ego te non pro amico, sed pro hoste habebo."

"quibus rebus cognitis, principes britanniae, qui post proelium ad caesarem convenerant, inter se conlocuti, cum et equites et naves et frumentum romanis deesse intellegerent et paucitatem militum ex castrorum exiguitate cognoscerent, QUAE HOC erant etiam angustior quod sine impedimentis caesar legiones transportaverat,  optimum factu esse duxerunt rebellione facta frumento commeatuque nostros prohibere et rem in hiemem producere, quod his superatis aut reditu interclusis neminem postea belli inferendi causa in britanniam transiturum confidebant."|"quae hoc: quae refers to castrorum; hoc, on this account."

"NOT FOUND"|"What do you think of the speech of Ariovistus? What claim does he make? What does he say about the friendship of the Romans? What offer does he make to Caesar?"

"nam quod hostibus adpropinquabat, consuetudine sua caesar vi legiones expeditas ducebat;  post eas totius exercitus impedimenta conlocarat; inde duae legiones QUAE PROXIME conscriptae erant totum agmen claudebant praesidioque impedimentis erant."|"quae proxime . . . fecerant: who had last made war upon him, viz. the Veneti, the Venelli, and the Sotiates."

"ad haec caesar respondit: se magis consuetudine sua quam merito eorum civitatem conservaturum, si prius quam murum aries attigisset se dedidissent;  sed deditionis nullam esse condicionem NISI ARMIS traditis."|"17. nisi armis traditis: unless their arms should be delivered up19. dediticiis populi Romani: on the subjects of the Roman people."

"NOT FOUND"|"9. Duae uxores: among the ancient Germans, polygamy seems to have been confined to the chieftains."

"NOT FOUND"|"4. magnis cum portoriis: with heavy duties. This refers to the imposts levied by these Alpine tribes upon all the merchandise carried through their territory. Caesar wished to open a route by which merchandise might be brought into Gaul free of duty.Pages 126, 127] NOTES ***BOOKS II, 35-III, 3arbitraretur: attracted into the subjunctive by conlocaret*uti . ***. conlocaret: object clause^ of purpose with permisit."

"NOT FOUND"|"uteretur: subjunctive in an indirect question."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. Chapter 22.***Soldurios: observe that soldurii is the Celtic name for the Latin devoti."

"NOT FOUND"|"intermitterent... ponerent: substantive clause of purpose, cognate object of certiores facit. These subjunctives all represent the imperative of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"4. Unum . . . despoliaret: Direct as follows:Unum petimus et deprecamur; si forte pro tua clementia ac mansuetudine, quam ab aliis audimus, statueris Aduatucos esse conservandos, noli nos armis despoliare."

"NOT FOUND"|"dixeramus: see p. hi, 11. 3-5."

"NOT FOUND"|"quas ... civitates: to visit as many states as possible."

"NOT FOUND"|"sibi... temperaturos ... quin ... divideret: indirect discourse, depending on existimabat."

"at hostes, etiam in extrema spe salutis, tantam virtutem praestiterunt ut, cum primi eorum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus insisterent atque ex eorum corporibus pugnarent,  his deiectis et coacervatis cadaveribus qui superessent ut ex tumulo tela in nostros conicerent et pila intercepta remitterent:  ut non nequiquam tantae virtutis homines iudicari deberet ausos esse transire latissimum flumen, ascendere altissimas ripas, subire iniquissimum locum; QUAE FACILIA ex difficillimis animi magnitudo redegerat."|"quae facilia, etc.: such deeds, in themselves most difficult (lit. from the most difficult), great heroism had rendered easy."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. nullum . . . factum: no deed a little braver than usual."

"petit atque hortatur ut SINE EIUS offensione animi vel ipse de eo causa cognita statuat vel civitatem statuere iubeat."|"sine eius, etc.: without offense to his feelings ; i.e. to the feelings of Diviciacus."

"NOT FOUND"|"eum: referring to* locum."

"qui cupidius NOVISSIMUM AGMEN insecuti alieno loco cum equitatu helvetiorum proelium committunt; et pauci de nostris cadunt."|"novissimum agmen: the rear, lit. the newest line. Compare agmen, an army in line of march, exercitus, the general word for army, as composed of trained men, and acies, an army in battle array, line of battle."

"HI CUM tantopere de potentatu inter se multos annos contenderent, factum esse uti ab arvernis sequanisque germani mercede arcesserentur."|"Hi cum ... multos annos contenderent: idiomatic use of the imperfect, best rendered by the pluperfect; compare this with the corresponding use of the imperfect indicative. H. 535; LM. 738; A. 277, b; G. 234; B. 260, 4; (H. 469, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cum . *** *** fecisset: a temporal clause; see cum .. . quaereret, p. 101,17."

"helvetios, tulingos, latobrigos in fines suos, unde erant profecti, reverti iussit, et, QUOD OMNIBUS frugibus amissis domi nihil erat quo famem tolerarent, allobrogibus imperavit ut iis frumenti copiam facerent; ipsos oppida vicosque, quos incenderant, restituere iussit."|"quod omnibus constabat, etc.; because it was generally understood (evident to all), etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"intulissent: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"28. ut . . . utatur: object clause of purpose, object of Petere; see ne . . . adduceretur, p. 99,1. 7."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haedui: in partitive apposition with legati."

"NOT FOUND"|"14. accessisset, poneret: note change of tense in translating."

"NOT FOUND"|"digiti ... crassitudine: of the thickness of a thumb ; ablative of characteristic."

"QUOD SI veteris contumeliae oblivisci vellet, num etiam recentium iniuriarum, quod eo invito iter per provinciam per vim temptassent, quod haeduos, quod ambarros, quod allobrogas vexassent, memoriam deponere posse?"|"Quod si . . . discessisset: but if he would withdraw."

"NOT FOUND"|"inusitatior: especially novel."

"ariovistus ex equis ut conloquerentur et PRAETER SE denos ad conloquium adducerent postulavit."|"praeter se denos: ten each beside themselves."

"quibus ex navibus cum essent expositi milites circiter ccc atque in castra contenderent, morini, quos caesar in britanniam proficiscens pacatos reliquerat, spe praedae adducti primo NON ITA magno suorum numero circumsteterunt ac, si sese interfici nollent, arma ponere iusserunt."|"non ita magno: not so very large,circumsteterunt: surrounded them, i.e. the three hundred."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 153, line 1. *** quod ... commisissent: reason given by the Germans; hence the subjunctive."

"NOT FOUND"|"phalanga: note the Greek accusative in a."

"sibi autem mirum videri quid in sua gallia, QUAM BELLO vicisset, aut caesari aut omnino populo romano negotii esset."|"20. quam bello .. . voluisset: since it (the senate) had decreed (wished) that it (i.e. Gaul), though vanquished in war, should retain its own laws."

"NOT FOUND"|"aditum: access, i.e. to the senate, by whom the honor was conferred."

"NOT FOUND"|"idem: subject of esse faciendum, explained by ut domo emigrent. . . experiantur, in apposition with it; see notes on ut igni cremaretur, p. 58, 1. 21, and ut. . . exeant, p. 59, 1. 2."

"ID HOC facilius iis persuasit, quod undique loci natura helvetii continentur: una ex parte flumine rheno latissimo atque altissimo, qui agrum helvetium a germanis dividit; altera ex parte monte iura altissimo, qui est inter sequanos et helvetios; tertia lacu lemanno et flumine rhodano, qui provinciam nostram ab helvetiis dividit."|"Id hoc facilius iis persuasit: he persuaded them to that course (i.e. ut exirent) the more easily on this account (i.e. quod . . . continentur). Id is the object of persuasit, lit. persuaded that to them; ***hoc is ablative of cause."

"gallorum eadem atque belgarum oppugnatio est haec: ubi circumiecta multitudine hominum totis moenibus undique in murum lapides iaci COEPTI SUNT murusque defensoribus nudatus est, testudine facta portas succedunt murumque subruunt."|"23- coepti sunt: why not coeperuntf H. 299, 1; A. 143, a; G. 423, N. 3;133, 15 (H. 297, 0**defensoribus: ablative of separation. H. 462; LM. 600; A. 243, a; G. 405; B. 214, 1, c; (H. 414,1)."

"QUOD MULTITUDINEM germanorum in galliam traducat, id se sui muniendi, non galliae oppugnandae causa facere; eius rei testimonium esse quod nisi rogatus non venerit et quod bellum non intulerit sed defenderit."|"Quod multitudinem . . . se interpellaremus: write these sentences in the direct discourse."

"haedui, cum se suaque ab iis defendere non possent, legatos ad caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium:  ita se omni tempore de populo romano meritos esse ut paene in conspectu exercitus nostri AGRI VASTARI, liberi [eorum] in servitutem abduci, oppida expugnari non debuerint."|"agri vastari non debuerint: that their fields ought not to have been pillaged. Note the difference of Jdiom between the Latin and the English in thevuse of verbs meaning oughts the former denoting completed action by the finite verb debuerint, ought; the English by the infinitive vastari, to have been pillaged."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galbam: Servius Galba was one of Caesar***s lieutenants, and an ancestor of the Emperor Galba."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 38. *** viam: cognate accusative."

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam tanto suo populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum IN CONSULATU suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus esset, hanc sibi populoque romano gratiam referret ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, haec esse quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret ut quos illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"in consulatu suo: i.e. in the preceding year, 59 b.c."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. neque ... poterant: this is the principal or independent clause of the sentence. All that precedes is preparatory to it and grammatically dependent upon it, hut the independent clause is itself compound, consisting of three distinct clauses, introduced by neque ... neque ... neque, with the three subjects, subsidia, quid ... opus esset, and imperia."

"NOT FOUND"|"Atrebates: object of compulerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"eorum: their (of them), referring to quos, whose antecedent is his. secundiores res: greater prosperity."

"NOT FOUND"|"ad Caesarem: construe with reverterunt."

"ariovistum SE CONSULE cupidissime populi romani amicitiam adpetisse; cur hunc tam temere quisquam ab officio discessurum iudicaret?"|"se consule: in his (Caesar***s) consulship, the preceding year; ablative absolute."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 86, line 1. *** quantum . . . constantia: how much virtue there is in resolution, lit. how much of good resolution has in itself."

"hostes undique circumventi desperatis omnibus rebus se PER MUNITIONES deicere et fuga salutem petere contenderunt."|"per munitiones: over (through) the fortifications,10. quae ... convenisse constabat: quae, referring to milium, is the subject of convenisse, and the clause quae ... convenisse is the subject of constabat."

"his constitutis rebus et consilio cum legatis et quaestore communicato, ne quem diem pugnae praetermitteret, oportunissima res accidit, quod postridie eius diei mane eadem et perfidia et simulatione usi germani frequentes, omnibus principibus maioribusque natu adhibitis, ad eum in castra venerunt,  simul, ut dicebatur, sui purgandi causa, quod contra atque esset dictum et ipsi petissent, proelium pridie commisissent, simul ut, si QUID POSSENT, de indutiis fallendo impetrarent."|"quid . . . possent: how powerful they were; quid. H. 409, I; LM. 503; A. 238; G. 333, 2; B. 176, 4; (H. 378, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"noluit.. . locum ... vacare: what is the regular construction with volo, malot and nolo? H. 565, 2 ; LM. 965, 967; A. 331, b\ G. 546, r. 1 and 2; B. 331, IV, 296, 1, a; (H. 499, 2; 535, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"31* potuerit: subjunctive of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"adamassent: what is the full form, and how is adamassent derived from it?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Lingonum: see Vocabulary and Map of Gaul.	***1die quarto: in three days, lit. on the fourth day, probably including tneday of the battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"quare putaret: to think; a clause of result."

"NOT FOUND"|"suum, sed imperatoris esse: was theirs, but the commander's."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ***.. coicerent: causal clause. H. 598; LM. 863; A. 326; G. 586; B. 286, 2; (H. 517)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 58, line 1. *** Is sibi suscepit: he took upon himself lit. undertook for himself. H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III; (H. 386)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo . *** *** posset: relative clause with indefinite antecedent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAPages 82, 83]	NOTES ***BOOK i, 35-37suo, sibi: suo refers to Caesar, but sibi in the same clause refers to Ariovistus."

"cum EX DEDITICIIS belgis reliquisque gallis complures caesarem secuti una iter facerent, quidam ex his, ut postea ex captivis cognitum est, eorum dierum consuetudine itineris nostri exercitus perspecta, nocte ad nervios pervenerunt atque his demonstrarunt inter singulas legiones impedimentorum magnum numerum intercedere, neque esse quicquam negotii, cum prima legio in castra venisset reliquaeque legiones magnum spatium abessent, hanc sub sarcinis adoriri;  qua pulsa impedimentisque direptis, futurum ut reliquae contra consistere non auderent."|"ex dediticiis Belgis . . . complures: many of those Belgians who had surrendered\ viz., the Ambiani, Suessiones, and Bellovaci; see unus ex iist p. 104, 1. 1."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 5. *** Cum iam . . . pugnaretur: when the battle had been waged more than, etc. H. 541, I; 535; LM. 738; A. 277, b\ G. 234; B. 260, 4; (H. 469, II, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . debuerint: result; see ut . . . possent; p. 57, 1. 14. Explain tense. H. 550; LM. 806; A. 2^7, c; G. 513; B. 268, 6; (H. 495, VI)."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . . . curet: to see that that force is kept separate, i.e. is prevented from effecting a junction with the Veneti; relative clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . vagarentur et . . . possent: substantive clause of result, subject of flebat. H. 571, ij LM. 902; A. 332, a, 2; G. 553, 3; B. 297, 2; (H. 501, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"posse: the subject is imperia."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 83, line 2. *** si in eo . . . convenisset: if they would abide by that which had been agreed upon, lit. remain in that which had come together."

"NOT FOUND"|"Aegre sustentatum est: the attack was sustained with difficulty ; an impersonal construction."

"caesari cum id nuntiatum esset, eos per provinciam nostram iter facere conari, maturat ab urbe proficisci et QUAM MAXIMIS potest itineribus in galliam ulteriorem contendit et ad genavam pervenit."|"quam maximis potest itineribus: with the longest possible day's journeys, i.e. as rapidly as possible, lit. with marches as the greatest he can, elliptical for as great as the greatest he can; see quarn maximum, p. 57, 1. 23."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 157, line 2. *** quae .. . exciperent: relative clause of purpose."

"quod non fore dicto audientes neque signa laturi dicantur, nihil se ea re commoveri: SCIRE ENIM, quibuscumque exercitus dicto audiens non fuerit, aut male re gesta fortunam defuisse aut aliquo facinore comperto avaritiam esse convictam."|"scire enim, etc.: for he knew that those (commanders) whose armies were not obedient (lit. to whomsoever the army was not obedient) had been unsuccessful in consequence of mismanagement (lit. good fortune had deserted, etc.), or had been convicted of avarice on the discovery of some overt act (lit.NOTES ***BOOK I, 40, 41avarice had been proved against them). Caesar***s view is, that armies mutiny only when their commanders have been unsuccessful or guilty of crime."

"is ita cum caesare egit: si pacem populus romanus cum helvetiis faceret, IN EAM partem ituros atque ibi futuros helvetios ubi eos caesar constituisset atque esse voluisset;  sin bello persequi perseveraret, reminisceretur et veteris incommodi populi romani et pristinae virtutis helvetiorum."|"in eam partem, etc.: in the direction in which the wind was blowing."

"NOT FOUND"|"Have you noticed in this chapter any construction with which you were not already familiar?"

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the situation of the Romans at the beginning of the 22d chapter? What at the end of the 23d?"

"NOT FOUND"|"consolatus: best rendered by a present participle. H.640,1; LM. ion; A. 290, b\ G. 282, N.; B. 336, 5; (H. 550, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARpatrum: subjective genitive. H. 440, 1; LM. 553; A. 213, 1; G. 364; B. 199; (H. 396, II)."

"caesar una aestate duobus maximis bellis confectis maturius paulo quam tempus anni postulabat in hiberna in sequanos exercitum deduxit; hibernis labienum praeposuit;  ipse in citeriorem galliam AD CONVENTUS agendos profectus est."|"ad conventus agendos: to hold the assizes or courts. The Roman governors of provinces usually employed their time in winter in the civil duties ""**f their office. They held courts, corrected abuses, levied taxes, and exercisedcontrolling influence over public affairs; but Caesar may have had an addi- .ional motive for spending the winter in his Cisalpine province. He doubtless wished to be as near Rome as possible that he might watch the movements of political parties, and thus be able to take advantage of any opportunity to promote his own ambitious designs."

"NOT FOUND"|"fecissent: attracted into the subjunctive; see quem . . . iudicassent, p. 77,1.14."

"NOT FOUND"|"When was Ariovistus called king and friend by the Roman senate? What conditional promise does Caesar here make to Ariovistus, and what conditional threat does he add?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ut.. . ferrent: substantive clause of purpose, subject of poterat, or, rather, of the impersonal expression, persuaderi poterat."

"favere et cupere helvetiis propter eam adfinitatem, odisse etiam SUO NOMINE caesarem et romanos, quod eorum adventu potentia eius deminuta et diviciacus frater in antiquum locum gratiae atque honoris sit restitutus."|"suo nomine: on his own account, on personal grounds; ablative of cause."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque ACIEM OCULORUM dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit ut non mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"aciem oculorum: the fierce expression of their eyes."

"at sugambri, ex eo tempore quo pons institui coeptus est fuga comparata, hortantibus iis quos ex tencteris atque usipetibus apud se habebant, finibus suis excesserant suaque omnia exportaverant seque IN SOLITUDINEM ac silvas abdiderant."|"16. in solitudinem: note in with the accusative, though our idiom would lead us to expect the ablative; but in Latin abdere is often thus treated as a verb of motion."

"NOT FOUND"|"questum: supine, expressing the purpose of veniebant."

"genus hoc erat pugnae, quo se germani exercuerant:  equitum milia erant vi, totidem numero pedites velocissimi ac fortissimi, QUOS EX omni copia singuli singulos suae salutis causa delegerant:  cum his in proeliis versabantur, ad eos se equites recipiebant; hi, si quid erat durius, concurrebant, si qui graviore vulnere accepto equo deciderat, circumsistebant;  si quo erat longius prodeundum aut celerius recipiendum, tanta erat horum exercitatione celeritas ut iubis sublevati equorum cursum adaequarent."|"quos ex ... delegerant: whom they (the cavalry) had individually selected from the whole multitude."

"NOT FOUND"|"praefectos: see 84."

"principibus gallice evocatis caesar ea quae cognoverat dissimulanda sibi existimavit, eorumque animis PERMULSIS ET confirmatis equitatu imperato bellum cum germanis gerere constituit."|"permulsis, etc.: he soothed and encouraged them as if he thought them perfectly true to him."

"NOT FOUND"|"Rauracis: give construction; see civitati persuasit, p. 57, 1. 3."

"id hoc facilius iis persuasit, quod undique LOCI NATURA helvetii continentur: una ex parte flumine rheno latissimo atque altissimo, qui agrum helvetium a germanis dividit; altera ex parte monte iura altissimo, qui est inter sequanos et helvetios; tertia lacu lemanno et flumine rhodano, qui provinciam nostram ab helvetiis dividit."|"loci natura: by the character of their situation."

"NOT FOUND"|"et. .. sibi persuasum habebant: and because they were convinced that the Romans, etc.; see coactum habebat, p. 66, 1. 12. Romanos, subject of conari; sibi, indirect object of persuasum; see his persuaderi, p. 106,1. 20."

"NOT FOUND"|"nostrae: i.e. our ships."

"HIS PERSUADERI ut diutius morarentur neque suis auxilium ferrent non poterat."|"his persuaderi . . . non poterat: these (the Bellovaci) could not be persuaded, etc., lit. it could not be persuaded to these; his indirect object of persuaderi. H. 426, 3; A. 230; G. 217; B. 187, II, b; (H. 384, 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"ipse abesset: and he himself (Caesar) was distant; abesset, in the same construction as tenereturpassibus: probably best explained as ablative with longius, like milibus after amplius, p. 66,1. 24, though it may be explained as measure of difference."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this with the form in Caesar; note and explain differences."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones CERTISSIMAE RES accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo iniussu suo et civitatis sed etiam inscientibus ipsis fecisset, quod a magistratu haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare in eum aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"certissimae res: most undoubted facts, explained by the four quodclauses in apposition with res; quod per .. . quod obsides, etc., see p. 62, 11. 10-13. H* 588** 3** LM-	A. 333; G. 525, 2; B. 299; (H. 540, 4)."

"qui ubi pro perfuga ad eos venit, timorem romanorum proponit, quibus angustiis ipse caesar a venetis prematur docet,  NEQUE LONGIUS abesse quin proxima nocte sabinus clam ex castris exercitum educat et ad caesarem auxilii ferendi causa proficiscatur."|"neque longius quam ... pertinebant: not further than the cleared land extended, lit. not further than to what limit, etc.; porrecta is to be construed with pertinebant, which it seems to emphasize."

"NOT FOUND"|"+26. Chapter 16. *** Interim: during what time?"

"NOT FOUND"|"regni: what kind of a genitive? Cf. regni cupiditas, a desire for (of) regal power, and regnum cupity he desires regal power. H. 440,2; LM. 571;217; G. 363, 2; B. 200 ; (H.^356, III)."

"interim saepe cum legati ultro citroque inter eos mitterentur, ariovistus postulavit ne quem peditem ad conloquium caesar adduceret: VERERI SE ne per insidias ab eo circumveniretur; uterque cum equitatu veniret: alia ratione sese non esse venturum."|"Vereri se . . . venturum: write this in the direct discourse. On what does Vereri depend? How do you render ut and ne after verbs of fearing?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 80, line 1, Chapter 32. *** oratione habita : notice the Latin idiom, orationem habere, to deliver a speech."

"ita dies circiter xv iter fecerunt uti inter novissimum hostium agmen et nostrum primum NON AMPLIUS quinis aut senis milibus passuum interesset."|"non amplius milia: see milia . . . octo, p. 103,1. 18; amplius does not affect the construction. H. 471, 4; LM. 618; A. 247, c; G. 296, R. 4; B. 217, 3; (H. 417, I, N. 2)."

"eo cum venisset, ea quae fore suspicatus erat facta cognovit:  missas legationes ab non nullis civitatibus ad germanos invitatosque eos uti ab rheno discederent: omnia quae postulassent ab se FORE PARATA."|"fore parata: future perfect passive infinitive, representing the future perfect indicative, and depending on a verb of saying implied in invitatos. H. 619, 4; LM. 985; (H. 537, 3, N. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"commeatu: commeatus means literally a going to and fro, but in Caesar it usually means supplies, provisions. What is the connection between these two meanings?"

"HAC RE statim caesar per speculatores cognita insidias veritus, quod qua de causa discederent nondum perspexerat, exercitum equitatumque castris continuit."|"Hac re Caesar . . . cognita: the subject of a sentence is often thus inserted in the ablative absolute when it is the agent of the action expressed by the participle. Here Caesar is the agent of the action denoted by cognita."

"NOT FOUND"|"quicquam: construe with trans Rhenum, quod ... premerentur: explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"ab . . . cohortatione: after exhorting the tenth legion."

"NOT FOUND"|"summum ... locum: the summit occupied by the camp, lit. of the camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"Rhenum: H. 413; LM. 501; A. 239, 2, 6; G. 331, R. I; B. 179; (H. 376)."

"HUC ACCEDEBANT xviii onerariae naves, quae ex eo loco a milibus passuum viii vento tenebantur quo minus in eundem portum venire possent: has equitibus tribuit."|"Huc accedebat: to this number of vessels were to be added,ex eo loco, from that place, probably Port Itius."

"NOT FOUND"|"nostris: probably the indirect object of tulit."

"NOT FOUND"|"magnam . . . facultatem: it offered abundant means for protracting the war; i.e. against Caesar, *** a reason why it should not be permitted to fall into the hands of Ariovistus;ut. . . circumductum: as if traced by a pair of compasses : circumductum agrees with flumen, not with Dubis."

"NOT FOUND"|"4. hominum: of the men ; i.e. of the Britons."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 84, line 1.*** facultas, facultatem: compare meanings in these two passages."

"NOT FOUND"|"Haeduos frumentum: two accusatives with flagitare. H. 411; LM. 522; A. 239, 2; G. 339; B. 178; (H. 374)."

"ac si quando magnitudine operis forte superati, extruso mari aggere ac molibus atque his oppidi moenibus adaequatis, suis fortunis desperare coeperant, magno numero navium adpulso, CUIUS REI summam facultatem habebant, omnia sua deportabant seque in proxima oppida recipiebant:  ibi se rursus isdem oportunitatibus loci defendebant."|"cuius rei : a work in which. H. 451,1; LM. 573; A. 218, a; G. 374; B. 204, 1; (H. 399,1, 2)."

"ACIE TRIPLICI instituta et celeriter viii milium itinere confecto, prius ad hostium castra pervenit quam quid ageretur germani sentire possent."|"acie triplici: see note on triplicem aciem, p. 72,1. 18."

"de numero eorum omnia se habere explorata remi dicebant, propterea quod PROPINQUITATIBUS ADFINITATIBUSQUE coniuncti quantam quisque multitudinem in communi belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit cognoverint."|"propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque: by ties of relationship and by matrimonial alliances. For the plural of abstract nouns, see H. 138, 2; A. 75, c; G. 204, N. 5; (H. 130, 2).NOTES ***BOOK II, 4, 5Page 102, line 1. *** quantam . . . pollicitus sit: indirect question; see quae . . . essent, p. ioi, 1. 17. Explain tense. H. 644, I; LM. 1032; A. 336, B, a; G. 654; B. 318; (H. 525, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"commodissimum: agreeing with the clause, eo legionarios ... imponere, which is the subject of esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"lintribus: canoes, often made from the trunks of trees, transibant: observe the force of the imperfect, were crossing."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones certissimae res accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo iniussu suo et civitatis sed etiam inscientibus ipsis fecisset, quod A MAGISTRATU haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare in eum aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"a magistratu: i.e. by Liscus."

"his rebus pace confirmata, post diem quartum quam est in britanniam ventum naves xviii, de quibus supra demonstratum est, quae equites sustulerant, ex SUPERIORE PORTU leni vento solverunt."|"superiore portu: the upper port; called also ulterior portus; see note on ulteriorem portum, p. 160, 1. 15."

"capto monte et succedentibus nostris, boi et tulingi, qui hominum milibus circiter xv agmen hostium claudebant et novissimis praesidio erant, EX ITINERE nostros ab latere aperto adgressi circumvenire, et id conspicati helvetii, qui in montem sese receperant, rursus instare et proelium redintegrare coeperunt."|"ex itinere nostros adgressi: attacking our men on the march, i.e. as they advanced against the Helvetii."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibuscum . . . superarint: render in two clauses, whom the Helvetii had often met and generally defeated, not only, etc., lit. with whom the Helvetii having often met, etc. illorum refers to the Germans."

"CUI RATIONI contra homines barbaros atque imperitos locus fuisset, hac ne ipsum quidem sperare nostros exercitus capi posse."|"Cui rationi . . . hac, etc.: antecedent retained in the relative clause, that not even he (Ariovistus) could hope that our armies could be caught by that stratagem, which had been used against, etc., lit. for which there had been room against, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"oppugnare, expugnare : oppugnare generally means to attack, assault; expugnare, to take by storm ; see 117."

"NOT FOUND"|"Helvetiis esse in animo: see note on sibi esse in animo, p. 60,1. 15. The subject of esse is the clause per agrum ... facere."

"si PER POPULUM romanum stipendium remittatur et dediticii subtrahantur, non minus libenter sese recusaturum populi romani amicitiam quam adpetierit."|"per populum: why not a populo ? Because the result here contemplated, stipendium remittatur, is not viewed as the proposed object of the Roman people, *** an act performed by them as a voluntary agent,*** but merely as brought about indirectly through their means. H. 468, 3; A. 246, b\ G. 401; (H. 415, 1, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quartae . . . occisis: that all the centurions of the fourth cohort were slain, lit. all. . . having been slain. The student will remember that there were six centurions in each cohort, and ten cohorts in each legion; see note on omnium ordinum, p. 85, 1. 12. Remember, also, that the fourth cohort stood on the left of the front line, the position nearest to the camp, and thus the post of danger."

"NOT FOUND"|"Nantuatium: the Nantuates in iii, 1, are placed on the Rhone, while herethey are placed on the Rhine. If Caesar is not in error, there must have been two branches of this tribe. For the other proper names in this chapter, see Map and Vocabulary."

"NOT FOUND"|"significari: this depends on putant; its subject is the clause magnum ***.. non posse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Commium: object of mittit. Commius was one of the eleven Gallic kings mentioned by Caesar."

"haec cum pluribus verbis flens a caesare peteret, caesar eius dextram prendit; consolatus rogat finem orandi faciat; tanti EIUS APUD se gratiam esse ostendit uti et rei publicae iniuriam et suum dolorem eius voluntati ac precibus condonet."|"eius apud se: eius refers to Diviciacus; se to Caesar."

"caesar suos a proelio continebat, ac SATIS HABEBAT in praesentia hostem rapinis, pabulationibus populationibusque prohibere."|"satis habebat: deemed it sufficient. The object of habebat is the clause, hostem . *. prohibere."

"NOT FOUND"|"25* agat: why subjunctive?"

"NOT FOUND"|"continentesque *** ***. habebant: and because (quod) they had\ etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"Bruto: construe with constabat."

"NOT FOUND"|"magna auctoritate : ablative of characteristic; see summa nobilitate, p. 103,1. 29."

"NOT FOUND"|"voluerit: represents the perfect indicative of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"sibi: dative of the apparent agent. H. 431; LM. 544; A. 232; G. 355;189, 1; (H. 388)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 6. *** omnibus portis: through all the gates; ablative of means. For the gates of the Roman camp see 94, 1. In this instance a part of the village of Octodurus had been converted into a camp with the usual fortifications."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones certissimae res accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo iniussu suo et civitatis sed etiam inscientibus ipsis fecisset, quod a magistratu haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare IN EUM aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"in eum : to him, Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"L. Cassium: see note p. 60,1. 18."

"NOT FOUND"|"27. ut... praestaret: that it (our fleet) had the advantage."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, IN HIS diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam propinquis hostibus ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"in his regionibus: i.e. of Gaul, not of Britain."

"NOT FOUND"|"Allobrogibus . . . viderentur: indirect discourse, depending on existimabant. Explain mood; see obtenturus esset, p. 58, 1. 12."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque EO GRAVIUS ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  qui si alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed eo deceptum, quod neque commissum a se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"eo gravius ferre, etc.: that he was the more indignant, because they had not happened (lit. the less they had happened) in accordance with the deserts of the Roman people ; eo, quo, measure of difference, often best rendered by the . . . the. H. 479; LM. 655; A. 250c; G. 403; B. 223; (H. 423)."

"NOT FOUND"|"pilis: javelins ; s^e 86, 9."

"qui ubi pro perfuga ad eos venit, timorem romanorum proponit, quibus angustiis ipse caesar a venetis prematur docet,  NEQUE LONGIUS abesse quin proxima nocte sabinus clam ex castris exercitum educat et ad caesarem auxilii ferendi causa proficiscatur."|"neque longius . . . educat: and that it would not be later than the next night that Sabinus would, etc., lit. nor would it be farther off but that Sabinus, etc. Note well this peculiar idiom. H. 595, I; LM. 913; A. 319, d;G. 555 ; B. 284, 3; (H. 504)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 117, line 1. *** compleri, premi, etc.: notice that these infinitives must be rendered by a past tense in English, as they represent the action as going on at the time of vidissent. H. 61 j; LM. 978; A. 288; G. 529; B. 270; (H. 537)."

"qui suum timorem in rei frumentariae simulationem angustiasque itineris conferrent, facere arroganter, cum aut DE OFFICIO imperatoris desperare aut praescribere viderentur."|"de officio . . . praescribere: to despair of the fidelity of their commander or to dictate to him."

"compluribus his proeliis pulsis ab ocelo, quod est oppidum citerioris provinciae extremum, in fines vocontiorum ULTERIORIS PROVINCIAE die septimo pervenit; inde in allobrogum fines, ab allobrogibus in segusiavos exercitum ducit."|"ulterioris provinciae: i.e. the Roman province west of the Alps."

"eo cum venisset, ea quae fore suspicatus erat facta cognovit:  missas legationes ab non nullis civitatibus ad germanos invitatosque eos uti ab rheno discederent: omnia QUAE POSTULASSENT ab se fore parata."|"quae postulassent: which they (the Germans) might demand; po- stulassent represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 2. ***duas legiones; two legions, the 13th and the 14th."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. eo: on this account, viz. quod tantas ... arbitrabantur."

"eorum una pars, quam gallos obtinere DICTUM EST, initium capit a flumine rhodano, continetur garumna flumine, oceano, finibus belgarum, attingit etiam ab sequanis et helvetiis flumen rhenum, vergit ad septentriones."|"dictum est: give the subject H. 615; LM. 972; A. 329; G. 528, 2; B. 166, 1, b ; (H. 538)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES *** BOOK IV, 16, 17non sublicae . . *** perpendiculum: not like (in the manner of) anordinary pile, vertically."

"id ex itinere oppugnare conatus, quod vacuum ab defensoribus esse audiebat, propter latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem PAUCIS DEFENDENTIBUS expugnare non potuit."|"paucis defendentibus: though only a few defended it. H. 489, 1; LM. 640; A. 255; G. 410; B. 227; (H. 431, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARiniuriae sibi: H. 451, 2, n. 2; LM. 573; A. 218, a; G. 374; B. 204, 1; (H. 399, n. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 107, line 1. *** ad eos: i.e. ad hostes."

"NOT FOUND"|"Garumna flumine: what kind of an ablative? H. 476; LM. 645; A. 248, c, 1; G. 401; B. 218; (H. 420)."

"de tertia vigilia t. labienum, legatum pro praetore, cum DUABUS LEGIONIBUS et iis ducibus qui iter cognoverant summum iugum montis ascendere iubet; quid sui consilii sit ostendit."|"duabus legionibus: i.e. the two enrolled in Cisalpine Gaul, p. 99,1.17."

"caesar primum suo, deinde omnium ex conspectu remotis equis, ut aequato omnium periculo spem fugae tolleret, cohortatus suos PROELIUM COMMISIT."|"proelium commisit: for a general description of a battle, see 106-108; also note on chapter 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"prius ... venisse: here again Ariovistus misrepresents the facts in the case, as the Romans conquered the Averni in the year 121 B.c., long before he came into Gaul."

"NOT FOUND"|"propius . . . OCCasum: see note on propius se, p. 150, 1. 12."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui: refers to Dumnorigi."

"hostes, ubi et de expugnando oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse intellexerunt neque nostros in locum iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa viderunt atque ipsos RES FRUMENTARIA deficere coepit, concilio convocato constituerunt optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti, et quorum in fines primum romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur."|"res frumentaria deficere coepit: thus the want of a proper commissariat proved fatal to the Belgian confederacy."

"NOT FOUND"|"id: refers to necessariam rem enuntiarit."

"erant hae difficultates belli gerendi quas supra ostendimus, sed tamen multa caesarem ad id bellum incitabant:  iniuria retentorum equitum romanorum, rebellio facta post deditionem, defectio datis obsidibus, tot civitatum coniuratio, in primis ne hac parte neglecta reliquae nationes SIBI IDEM licere arbitrarentur."|"sibi idem licere : that the same course might be allowed them."

"NOT FOUND"|"Remis, hostibus: these are both datives, the former depending on accessit and the latter on discessit. H. 427; LM. 537; A. 229; G. 345, R. I; B. 188, 2, d; (H. 385, II, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"supra: see p. 160,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"venissent: subjunctive, depending on impedirent, attracted from the future perfect."

"NOT FOUND"|"victoribus . . . impeditum: that nothing was difficult for the victors."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galbae regis: see p. 102,1. 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"voluntate: ablative of cause."

"NOT FOUND"|"citatus: with a swift current."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 116, line 1.***his ea pars: his refers to Atrebates, and ea parsto the division under the command of Labienus."

"NOT FOUND"|"What subjunctives have you noticed in this chapter?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quantum: construe with auctoritatis, how great prestige."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why does Caesar make such haste to secure Vesontio?"

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . . . habeantur: subordinate clause, indirect. What mood would be used in the direct form?"

"NOT FOUND"|"omnium: of all, i.e. of all his officers, not of course of the cavalry. Observe that the possessive suo and pie possessive genitive omnium are treated as coordinate; cf. iniussu suoj>t civitatis, p. 69, 1. 12."

"NOT FOUND"|"Osismos, etc.: see Map and Vocabulary. Observe that the names of some of these tribes are retained in modern French, as Nantes from Namnetes, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"6. Chapter 15. *** cum . . . circumsteterant: whenever two or three ships surrounded single vessels. Notice the force of the distributives, binae, ternae."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne supplicio adficirentur: that they would be visited with punishment. H. 567 with 4; LM. 897; A. 331,/; G. 550; B. 296, 2; (H.498, III)."

"tigna bina sesquipedalia paulum ab imo praeacuta dimensa ad altitudinem fluminis INTERVALLO PEDUM duorum inter se iungebat."|"intervallo pedum .. . parte: at the distance of forty feet at the lower end (ab inferiore parte)."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUID vellent, ad id."|"si quid erat durius: if there was any unusual difficulty."

"NOT FOUND"|"altitudo: give the meaning here. What is the more common meaning of the word ? What connection is there between these two meanings ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"carinae planiores, etc.: notice the omission of the verb esse in this brief and rapid description."

"NOT FOUND"|"15. Chapter 22. *** magis ut... quam ut: rather as ,,, than as. For the usual line of battle, see 64."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod . . . postulasset: explain the subjunctive. What was the demand ? see p. 83,1. 15. Quod refers to id as its antecedent, per se: with his consent; se refers to Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. diversae: separate,ex loco superiore: having descended from their higher position, i.e. in pursuit of the Viromandui."

"NOT FOUND"|"magna altitudine: explain case; see incredibili lenitate, p. 63,1. 27."

"NOT FOUND"|"tribunis, praefectis: see 80 and 84."

"interim, consilio eius cognito et per mercatores perlato ad britannos, a compluribus insulae civitatibus ad eum legati veniunt, QUI POLLICEANTUR obsides dare atque imperio populi romani obtemperare."|"5. qui polliceantur . .. dare: promising to give, etc.; purpose. Note the present dare, to emphasize the immediate and certain fulfillment of the promise, instead of the common form, se daturos."

"NOT FOUND"|"sibi ... faceret: to grant them permission."

"neque multum frumento, sed maximam partem lacte atque pecore vivunt multum sunt in venationibus;  quae res et cibi genere et cotidiana exercitatione et libertate vitae, quod a pueris NULLO OFFICIO aut disciplina adsuefacti nihil omnino contra voluntatem faciunt, et vires alit et immani corporum magnitudine homines efficit."|"nullo officio adsuefacti: accustomed to no duty, lit. accustomed, trained in (by means of) no duty; ablative of means."

"neque enim temere praeter mercatores illo adit quisquam, neque HIS IPSIS quicquam praeter oram maritimam atque eas regiones quae sunt contra galliam notum est."|"his ipsis: i.e. mercatoribus; dative with notum."

"NOT FOUND"|"What tradition in regard to the ancestry of the Aduatuci does Caesar here mention?"

"NOT FOUND"|"armari: to arm themselves; reflexive like the Greek middle; render, to arm. H. 517; LM. 687; A. ill, a; G. 218; B. 256; (H. 465)."

"his rebus fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte HOMINES BELLANDI cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"homines bellandi cupidi : homines in apposition with the subject of adficiebantur, as they were men (lit. being men) fond of war. H. 626; LM. 998; A. 298; G. 428; B. 338, 1, b; (H. 542, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Sertorio: see Vocabulary."

"NOT FOUND"|"Expedition against the Morini and the Menapiiy 28, 29Chapter 28. *** omnia Gallia pacata: while all the rest of Gaul was at peace."

"hostes, ubi et de expugnando oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse intellexerunt neque nostros IN LOCUM iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa viderunt atque ipsos res frumentaria deficere coepit, concilio convocato constituerunt optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti, et quorum in fines primum romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur."|"in . . . locum: why not in uno loco ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"conarentur: attracted into the subjunctive by posset. H. 652; LM. 793; A. 342; G. 663, 1; B. 324; (H. 529, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. Chapter 21. *** certior factus, etc.: having been informed that the enemy had encamped\ etc.; see note on certiores facti sunt, p. 60, 1. 12."

"NOT FOUND"|"Oportere: impersonal with sese ... impediri as its impersonal subject."

"NOT FOUND"|"idoneo . . . loco: in a position in all respects suitable ; rebus, loco, Castris; ablatives of specification, place, and means; see exercitum castris, continuit, p. 107,1. 28."

"his caesar ita respondit: eo sibi minus dubitationis dari, quod eas res quas legati helvetii commemorassent memoria teneret, atque eo gravius ferre quo minus merito populi romani accidissent;  qui si alicuius iniuriae sibi conscius fuisset, non fuisse difficile cavere; sed EO DECEPTUM, quod neque commissum a se intellegeret quare timeret neque sine causa timendum putaret."|"eo deceptum: that they (the Roman people) were deceived by this; eo, ablative of means, explained by quod . .. intellegeret . . . putaret."

"NOT FOUND"|"omnes Belgas . . . has esse causas: this is an instance of the indirect discourse, oratio obliqua, very common in Caesar. It depends on certior fiebat, involving the idea of saying; see note on Caesarem certiorem faciunt\ p. 63, 1. 17. In the direct discourse this passage would stand thus:Omnes Belgae, quam tertiam esse Galliae partem diximus, contra populum Romanum coniurant obsidesque inter se dant. Coniurandi hae sunt causae."

"belgae ab extremis galliae finibus oriuntur, pertinent AD INFERIOREM partem fluminis rheni, spectant in septentrionem et orientem solem."|"17. ad inferiorem, etc.: they were carried toward the southwest."

"in castris helvetiorum tabulae repertae sunt litteris graecis confectae et ad caesarem relatae, quibus in tabulis NOMINATIM RATIO confecta erat, qui numerus domo exisset eorum qui arma ferre possent, et item separatim, quot pueri, senes mulieresque."|"nominatim ratio qui numerus, etc..: a full (by name) account, showing what number had left home ; an indirect question."

"NOT FOUND"|"domo: note the synonyms : domus, house, home; domicilium, abode, habitation; sedes, seat, settlement."

"NOT FOUND"|"consilio: this was a council of war, to which the chief officers of the legion and cavalry, including the first centurions, were invited; see 83."

"nostri AD UNUM omnes incolumes, perpaucis vulneratis, ex tanti belli timore, cum hostium numerus capitum ccccxxx milium fuisset, se in castra receperunt."|"ad unum omnes: all to a man, i.e. without exception."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 56, line 1. *** ab Sequanis: on the side of the Sequani, i.e. in their territory, lit. from the Sequani *** a common Latin idiom, using a, ab, e, or ex, where our idiom requires at, in, on, on the side of, or some similar expression."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter ii. *** Ea re: notice and explain the accumulation of ablatives in this sentence."

"nostri tamen, quod neque ordines servare neque firmiter insistere neque signa subsequi poterant atque alius alia ex navi quibuscumque signis occurrerat se adgregabat, magnopere perturbabantur;  hostes vero, notis omnibus vadii, ubi ex litore aliquos singulares ex navi egredientes conspexerant, incitatis equis impeditos adoriebantur,  plures paucos circumsistebant, alii ab latere aperto IN UNIVERSOS tela coiciebant."|"in universos: against our assembled forces; opposed to aliquos singulares,10."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo: ablative of means."

"NOT FOUND"|"igitized by Googlead se oppugnandum: to attack him."

"eodem die AB EXPLORATORIBUS certior factus hostes sub monte consedisse milia passuum ab ipsius castris octo, qualis esset natura montis et qualis in circuitu ascensus qui cognoscerent misit."|"ab exploratoribus : cf. per speculatores. For the distinction between speculatores and exploratores, see Vocabulary."

"haedui, cum SE SUAQUE ab iis defendere non possent, legatos ad caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium:  ita se omni tempore de populo romano meritos esse ut paene in conspectu exercitus nostri agri vastari, liberi [eorum] in servitutem abduci, oppida expugnari non debuerint."|"Se suaque omnia: object of permittere. The subject se is omitted, though the subject accusative is generally expressed."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 13. *** qui ... intulissent: relative clause of characteristic."

"HUNC ESSE delectum medium fere regionum earum quas suebi obtinerent; hic romanorum adventum expectare atque ibi decertare constituisse."|"Hunc esse . . . regionum: that this place had been selected near the center of those regions; medium = medium locum, governs regionum as a partitive genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 167-168infirmis *** . *** subiciendam: advisable to expose his shattered vessels to the storms, lit. that his voyage should be exposed to the storm as his vessels were weak (unsafe). He accordingly deemed it unsafe to wait for the hostages."

"eo opere perfecto praesidia disponit, castella communit, QUO FACILIUS, si se invito transire conentur, prohibere possit."|"quo facilius impedirent : that they might the more easily check."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ad ... silvarum: note position, showing the close connection of these words with the preceding sentence."

"DIE CONSTITUTA causae dictionis orgetorix ad iudicium omnem suam familiam, ad hominum milia decem, undique coegit, et omnes clientes obaeratosque suos, quorum magnum numerum habebat, eodem conduxit; per eos ne causam diceret se eripuit."|"23. Die constituta : on the appointed day ; ablative of time. Note gender. H. 486; LM. 630; A. 256; G. 393; B. 230; (H. 429):digitized by GoogleNOTES *** BOOK I, 4-6trium mensium: for three months ; genitive of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"2. uti... intellegat: purpose."

"divico respondit: ita helvetios a maioribus suis institutos esse uti obsides accipere, non dare, consuerint; EIUS REI populum romanum esse testem."|"eius rei: i.e. of the imprisonment of Commius."

"his nuntiis litterisque commotus caesar duas legiones in citeriore gallia novas conscripsit et INITA AESTATE in ulteriorem galliam qui deduceret q. pedium legatum misit."|"inita aestate: in the beginning of summer. H. 489, 1; LM. 640; A. 255; G. 410; B. 227; (H. 431, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 41. *** mentes: is used, rather than animi, to show that their judgments were convinced."

"NOT FOUND"|"quorum virtutis . . . singularis: whose reputation for courage is remark- able; quorum, subjective; virtutis, objective. H. 446, 2; A. 217, b; G. 363, r. 2; (H. 398, 2)."

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam TANTO SUO populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus esset, hanc sibi populoque romano gratiam referret ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, haec esse quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret ut quos illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"tanto SUO . . . adfectus: after he had been treated with so great kindness by him (Caesar) and the Roman people, lit. with his so great kindness, etc."

"ubi per exploratores caesar certior factus est tres iam partes copiarum helvetios id flumen traduxisse, quartam vero partem CITRA FLUMEN ararim reliquam esse, de tertia vigilia cum legionibus tribus e castris profectus ad eam partem pervenit quae nondum flumen transierat."|"citra flumen: on this side of the river, i.e. on the east side."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 16. *** triduum: H. 417; LM. 513; A. 256, 2; G. 336; B. 181; (H. 379)."

"NOT FOUND"|"princeps: see note on princeps poenas persolvit, p. 64, 1. 18. Here primawould, of course, be somewhat objectionable before the ordinal decima."

"NOT FOUND"|"diebus: ablative of measure of difference."

"NOT FOUND"|"Romani conversa . . . intulerunt: the Romans faced about and charged in two divisions, lit. advanced their standards turned about. The words conversa signa apply only to the third line (tertia acies), which faced about to meet the Boii and Tulingi, who had fallen upon the Roman flank. The first and second lines pressed forward against the Helvetii, who had been dislodged, but were attempting to renew the battle; see plate X."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallias: observe the force of the plural, referring to the several divisions of the country."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. Chapter 29. *** ut esset luna plena: result clause, subject of accidit."

"NOT FOUND"|"studium, voluntatem: loyalty, good will; note the asyndeton, so common in rapid and vivid narration."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WAR [Pages 131, 132in concluso mari: in a closed sea, referring to the Mediterranean."

"boios petentibus haeduis, quod egregia virtute erant cogniti, ut in finibus suis conlocarent, concessit; quibus illi agros dederunt quosque postea in parem iuris libertatisque condicionem ATQUE IPSI erant receperunt."|"19. atque ipsi erant: as they themselves enjoyed, lit. and (as) they themselves were. H. 657, I, N.; LM. 760; A. 156, a; G. 643; B. 341, I, c; (H. 451, 5)."

"pedestria esse itinera concisa aestuariis, navigationem impeditam propter inscientiam locorum paucitatemque portuum sciebant,  neque nostros exercitus propter inopiam frumenti diutius apud se morari posse confidebant;  ac iam ut omnia contra opinionem acciderent, tamen se plurimum navibus posse, [quam] romanos neque ullam facultatem habere navium, neque eorum locorum ubi bellum gesturi essent vada, portus, insulas novisse;  ac LONGE ALIAm esse navigationem in concluso mari atque in vastissimo atque apertissimo oceano perspiciebant."|"longe alia *** *** *** Galli: in a manner far different from the other Gauls."

"NOT FOUND"|"eadem perfidia: if Caesar had no stronger reasons for suspecting perfidy than those which he has given us, his own conduct seems absolutely inexcusable."

"dum ea geruntur, legione ex consuetudine una frumentatum missa, quae appellabatur vii, neque ulla ad id tempus belli suspicione interposita, cum pars hominum in agris remaneret, pars etiam in castra ventitaret, ii qui pro portis castrorum in statione erant caesari nuntiaverunt pulverem maiorem QUAM CONSUETUDO ferret in ea parte videri quam in partem legio iter fecisset."|"6. quam consuetudo ferret: than usual."

"septimo die, cum iter non intermitteret, ab exploratoribus certior factus est ariovisti copias A NOSTRIS milia passuum iiii et xx abesse."|"a nostris: from ours, i.e. from our forces."

"postea quam in vulgus militum elatum est QUA ARROGANTIA in conloquio ariovistus usus omni gallia romanis interdixisset, impetumque in nostros eius equites fecissent, eaque res conloquium ut diremisset, multo maior alacritas studiumque pugnandi maius exercitui iniectum est."|"qua arrogantia usus: with what arrogance, lit. using what arrogance."

"NOT FOUND"|"Who gives this reason?"

"NOT FOUND"|"qui . . . insilirent: subjunctive characterizing an indefinite antecedent."

"quibus rebus cognitis, principes britanniae, qui post proelium ad caesarem convenerant, inter se conlocuti, cum et equites et naves et frumentum romanis deesse intellegerent et paucitatem militum ex castrorum exiguitate cognoscerent, quae hoc erant etiam angustior quod sine impedimentis caesar legiones transportaverat,  optimum factu esse duxerunt rebellione facta frumento commeatuque nostros prohibere et rem in hiemem producere, quod HIS SUPERATIS aut reditu interclusis neminem postea belli inferendi causa in britanniam transiturum confidebant."|"his superatis: if these (Caesar and his men) should be conquered,rursus coniuratione facta: resuming hostility and forming a conspiracy; rursus does not mean a second iimet but back again, as from peace to war."

"NOT FOUND"|"Id: this, emphatic, i.e. the occupation of Vesontio by Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"militibus: apparent agent with desiliendum, etcmagno ... armorum: see 71."

"NOT FOUND"|"UNIVERSITY OF I0V\N /2Have you made yourself so familiar with the subjunctives in this chapter that you will be able in future to recognize and explain all similar subjunctives?"

"NOT FOUND"|"milia: why accusative? H. 417; LM. 513; A. 257; G. 335: B. 181; (H. 379)-This chapter furnishes illustrations of the distinction between the historical perfect, as in fuit> fecit, persuasit', and the imperfect, as in fiebat', adficiebantur, arbitrabantur, and patebant."

"NOT FOUND"|"coeperunt: the tenses of the present system are supplied by the verb incipio."

"NOT FOUND"|"primum . . . adduceretur and deinde . . . sollicitarentur: these clauses explain causas and give the two reasons for the conspiracy or confederacy."

"haec sibi esse curae; frumentum sequanos, leucos, lingones subministrare, IAMQUE ESSE in agris frumenta matura; de itinere ipsos brevi tempore iudicaturos."|"iamque esse . .. matura: it was probably about the middle of August."

"NOT FOUND"|"id: explained by the clause, ut flumen transirent, which is in apposition with it."

"his constitutis rebus et consilio cum LEGATIS ET quaestore communicato, ne quem diem pugnae praetermitteret, oportunissima res accidit, quod postridie eius diei mane eadem et perfidia et simulatione usi germani frequentes, omnibus principibus maioribusque natu adhibitis, ad eum in castra venerunt,  simul, ut dicebatur, sui purgandi causa, quod contra atque esset dictum et ipsi petissent, proelium pridie commisissent, simul ut, si quid possent, de indutiis fallendo impetrarent."|"25- legatis et quaestore: these were his chief officers; see 78, 79."

"NOT FOUND"|"fortunis: case ? What other constructions does desperare admit ? H. 405, I, N.; A. 227, b; (H. 386, 4)."

"NOT FOUND"|"14. Chapter 23 ***tertia fere vigilia: about the third watch, i.e, about midnight; probably on the night of August 26 and 27."

"NOT FOUND"|"545, II; LM. 804; A. 286; G. 509; B. 267; (H. 493). castellum . . . Titurius . . . pontemque: see p. 103,1. 13."

"is se praesente de se TER SORTIBUS consultum dicebat, utrum igni statim necaretur an in aliud tempus reservaretur: sortium beneficio se esse incolumem."|"ter sortibus consultum: that the lots were thrice consulted, lit. it was thrice consulted with lots. Three was a sacred or mystical number with certain nations of antiquity."

"HIS REBUS fiebat ut et minus late vagarentur et minus facile finitimis bellum inferre possent;  qua ex parte homines bellandi cupidi magno dolore adficiebantur."|"His rebus atque auditionibus : these reports, lit. these things and reports; auditionibus shows in what sense rebus is to be taken, *** surely not in the sense of facts, as they usually get ficta."

"NOT FOUND"|"citerioris Hispaniae: Hither Spain, from the Roman point of view, i.e. Spain north of the Ebro. The Aquitanians appear to have been related to the Iberians of Northern Spain. Hispaniae, predicate genitive with sunt, but better construed after civitates."

"c. valerius procillus, cum a custodibus in fuga trinis catenis vinctus traheretur, IN IPSUM caesarem hostes equitatu insequentem incidit."|"in ipsum Caesarem . .. incidit: fell into the hands of Caesar himself etc."

"hic primum ortus est a tribunis militum, praefectis, reliquisque qui ex urbe amicitiae causa caesarem secuti non magnum in re militari usum habebant:  quorum ALIUS ALIA causa inlata, quam sibi ad proficiscendum necessariam esse diceret, petebat ut eius voluntate discedere liceret; non nulli pudore adducti, ut timoris suspicionem vitarent, remanebant."|"alius alia causa, etc., one assigning one reason, another another. H. 516, 1; A. 203, c; G. 221, R. 1; B. 253, 2; (H. 459, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 72, line 1, Chapter 23. *** diei: H. 446, 5; LM. 553; A. 223, e; B. 201, 3, a; (H. 398** $)***biduum supererat cum ... metiri oporteret: two days remained before (when) it would be necessary, etc.; see diem instare quo die . . . metiri operter et, p. 67,1. 9; operteret, a potential subjuncti*^4. milibus: see note on passibus, p. 71,1. 13."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 22. *** Prima luce: at daybreak."

"quibus rebus cognitis, cum ad has suspiciones certissimae res accederent, quod per fines sequanorum helvetios traduxisset, quod obsides inter eos dandos curasset, quod ea omnia non modo iniussu suo et civitatis sed etiam INSCIENTIBUS IPSIS fecisset, quod a magistratu haeduorum accusaretur, satis esse causae arbitrabatur quare in eum aut ipse animadverteret aut civitatem animadvertere iuberet."|"inscientibus ipsis: without their knowledge; ipsis refers to Caesar and the Haedui."

"NOT FOUND"|"exercitum: exercitus is the generic word for army, as composed of disciplined men; agmen, an army on the march; acies, an army in line of battle."

"ubi ea dies quam constituerat cum legatis venit et legati ad eum reverterunt, NEGAT SE more et exemplo populi romani posse iter ulli per provinciam dare et, si vim facere conentur, prohibiturum ostendit."|"9. negat se . . . posse .. . dare: he says that he cannot consistently with the usage and precedent of the Roman people give, etc. Mos denotes established usage; exemplum simply an example or precedent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 147, line 1. *** eorum moribus: in their view ; ablative of cause."

"his responsis ad caesarem relatis, iterum ad eum caesar legatos cum his mandatis mittit:  quoniam tanto suo populique romani beneficio adfectus, cum in consulatu suo rex atque amicus a senatu appellatus esset, hanc sibi populoque romano gratiam referret ut in conloquium venire invitatus gravaretur neque de communi re dicendum sibi et cognoscendum putaret, haec esse quae ab eo postularet:  primum ne quam multitudinem hominum amplius trans rhenum in galliam traduceret; deinde obsides quos haberet ab haeduis redderet sequanisque permitteret UT QUOS illi haberent voluntate eius reddere illis liceret; neve haeduos iniuria lacesseret neve his sociisque eorum bellum inferret."|"ut quos . . . liceret: to restore with his full concurrence those which they held\ lit. so that it might be allowed them to restore, etc. This is a substantive clause, and the object of permitteret; eius refers to Ariovistus; illi and illis to the Sequani."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . .. renuntiavisse: had reported to him what he had not seen as if seen, lit. for seen. Observe that the implied antecedent of quod is the object of renuntiavisse, and, in fact, that quod is used very much like what in our translation, which contains both antecedent and relative, being equivalent to that which ; viso is a participle used as a substantive."

"NOT FOUND"|"utrum ... an: a double question. H. 380; LM. 705; A. 211;461; B. 162, 4; (H. 353** O*sequatur, iturum: both represent the future indicative of the direct discourse. Explain tense of sequatur."

"AD EAS res conficiendas biennium sibi satis esse duxerunt; in tertium annum profectionem lege confirmant."|"Ad eas res conficiendas: gerundive construction; see ad effeminandos animos, p. 55,1. 10."

"NOT FOUND"|"What did Caesar find to be the condition of things on the right of his army? What was the effect of his appearance at that point?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Are all the subjunctives in this chapter to he explained by the indirect discourse?CAESAR***S GALLIC WARChapter 15. *** honoris Diviciaci . . . causa: out of regard for Diviciacus; honoris causa is a common expression of politeness and compliment; honoris depends on causa; Diviciaci on honoris; causa, ablative of cause."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ariovisti: predicate genitive with esse. H.447; LM. 556; A. 214, c\ G. 366; B. 198, 3; (H. 402)."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam magnis itineribus contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, QUA PROXIMUM iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, cum his quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"26. qua proximum iter ... per Alpes, i.e. by way of Mt. Genevre."

"NOT FOUND"|"Tigna bina sesquipedalia: two piles each a foot and a half thick. Tigna is the object of iungebat. The distributive bina is used because there were several pairs."

"NOT FOUND"|"premebantur: they were continually hard pressed; note the force of the imperfect."

"NOT FOUND"|"silvas, silva: silvas calls attention to different parts of the forest; silva, to the forest as a whole."

"quibus proeliis calamitatibusque fractos, qui et sua virtute et populi romani hospitio atque amicitia plurimum ante in gallia potuissent, coactos esse sequanis obsides dare nobilissimos civitatis et iure iurando civitatem obstringere seSE NEQUE obsides repetituros neque auxilium a populo romano imploraturos neque recusaturos quo minus perpetuo sub illorum dicione atque imperio essent."|"Se neque . . . existimavisse: write this in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Sullae: Lucius Cornelius Sulla, the famous Roman dictator and rival of Marius. He waged war against Mithridates from 87 to 84 B.C."

"erant omnino itinera duo, quibus itineribus domo exire possent: UNUM PER sequanos, angustum et difficile, inter montem iuram et flumen rhodanum, vix qua singuli carri ducerentur, mons autem altissimus impendebat, ut facile perpauci prohibere possent;   alterum per provinciam nostram, multo facilius atque expeditius, propterea quod inter fines helvetiorum et allobrogum, qui nuper pacati erant, rhodanus fluit isque non nullis locis vado transitur."|"unum per Sequanos: this route is now traversed by the railway*** from Geneva to Macon."

"NOT FOUND"|"imperitum rerum: ignorant of affairs. Construction of rerum ? see rei militaris, p. 71,1. 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"Atrebatibus superatis: i.e. in the great battle of the Sambre; see ii, 23."

"at hostes, etiam in extrema spe salutis, tantam virtutem praestiterunt ut, cum primi eorum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus insisterent atque ex eorum corporibus pugnarent,  his deiectis et coacervatis cadaveribus qui superessent UT EX tumulo tela in nostros conicerent et pila intercepta remitterent:  ut non nequiquam tantae virtutis homines iudicari deberet ausos esse transire latissimum flumen, ascendere altissimas ripas, subire iniquissimum locum; quae facilia ex difficillimis animi magnitudo redegerat."|"ut ex tumulo: as from a mound,pila intercepta remitterent: caught the javelins and hurled them back."

"NOT FOUND"|"dementiae: predicate genitive; see est... consuetudinis, p. 148,1. 21."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hoc: on this account; ablative of cause, explained by the clause quod soli ... horrerent."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAN8926. Chapter 21.***necessariis rebus imperatis: having given only the most necessary orders,quam in partem fors obtulit: in whatever direction fortune <Page 115, line i. *** Milites ... quam uti retinerent: having addressed the soldiers in a speech not longer than to exhort them to retain,*** 2. uti ... retinerent: object clause of purpose."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 29.***Reliquis deinceps diebus: in all the remaining days ; deinceps implies an uninterrupted series."

"namque IPSORUM NAVES ad hunc modum factae armataeque erant: carinae aliquanto planiores quam nostrarum navium, quo facilius vada ac decessum aestus excipere possent;  prorae admodum erectae atque item puppes, ad magnitudinem fluctuum tempestatumque accommodatae;  naves totae factae ex robore ad quamvis vim et contumeliam perferendam;  transtra ex pedalibus in altitudinem trabibus, confixa clavis ferreis digiti pollicis crassitudine;  ancorae pro funibus ferreis catenis revinctae;  pelles pro velis alutaeque tenuiter confectae, [hae] sive propter inopiam lini atque eius usus inscientiam, sive eo, quod est magis veri simile, quod tantas tempestates oceani tantosque impetus ventorum sustineri ac tanta onera navium regi velis non satis commode posse arbitrabantur."|"ipsorum naves: their vessels, in contrast with those of the Romans."

"legionis confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit, quartae cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, SIGNO AMISSO, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis aut occisis, in his primipilo p. sextio baculo, fortissimo viro, multis gravibusque vulneribus confecto, ut iam se sustinere non posset, reliquos esse tardiores et non nullos ab novissimis deserto loco proelio excedere ac tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes intermittere et ab utroque latere instare et rem esse in angusto vidit, neque ullum esse subsidium quod submitti posset,  scuto ab novissimis [uni] militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus milites signa inferre et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis uti possent."|"signo amisso: the loss of a standard was regarded as a great disgrace."

"NOT FOUND"|"victoria: H. 471, 1; LM. 617; A. 247, a; G. 644; B. 217, 2;(H. 417, 1)."

"ibi cum alii fossas complerent, alii multis telis coniectis defensores vallo munitionibusque depellerent, auxiliaresque, quibus ad pugnam non multum crassus confidebat, lapidibus telisque subministrandis et ad aggerem caespitibus comportandis speciem atque opinionem pugnantium praeberent, cum item ab hostibus constanter ac NON TIMIDE pugnaretur telaque ex loco superiore missa non frustra acciderent,  equites circumitis hostium castris crasso renuntiaverunt non eadem esse diligentia ab decumana porta castra munita facilemque aditum habere."|"non timide: valiantly; non belongs especially to timide, and not to the clause as a whole; hence, ac non, rather than neque."

"NOT FOUND"|"inermibus . . . militibus: while the soldiers, etc., ablative absolute."

"helvetii EA SPE deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numquam interdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"ea spe deiecti: disappointed in this hope, lit. cast down from this hope; what hop^? de in compounds usually means down, down from. For construction, see suit finibus, p. 55, 1. 15."

"eodem tempore equites nostri levisque armaturae pedites, qui cum iis una fuerant, quos primo hostium impetu pulsos dixeram, cum se in castra reciperent, adversis hostibus occurrebant ac rursus aliam in partem fugam petebant;  et calones, qui ab decumana porta ac summo iugo collis NOSTROS VICTORES flumen transire conspexerant, praedandi causa egressi, cum respexissent et hostes in nostris castris versari vidissent, praecipites fugae sese mandabant."|"nostros victores: our victorious troops or our troops as motors; nostros is used substantively, and victores is in apposition with it."

"his praeerat viridovix ac summam imperii tenebat earum omnium civitatum quae defecerant, ex quibus exercitum [magnasque copias] coegerat;  atque his paucis diebus aulerci eburovices lexoviique, senatu suo interfecto quod AUCTORES BELLI esse nolebant, portas clauserunt seque cum viridovice coniunxerunt;  magnaque praeterea multitudo undique ex gallia perditorum hominum latronumque convenerat, quos spes praedandi studiumque bellandi ab agri cultura et cotidiano labore revocabat."|"auctores belli esse : to sanction the war."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 37. *** Haec eodem tempore .. . veniebant: here the Latin coordinates two contemporaneous events, but the English subordinates one to the other; at the time when, etc., envoys were also arriving, etc."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numquam interdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, HOC CONATU destiterunt."|"hoc conatu: ablative of separation. Give another instance of this construction."

"moribus suis orgetoricem EX VINCULIS causam dicere coegerunt; damnatum poenam sequi oportebat, ut igni cremaretur."|"ex vinculis causam dicere: to make his defense in chains (lit. out of chains); see note on ab Seqjuanis, p. 56, 1. 1."

"NOT FOUND"|"5. equitatam: construe with subsequi iussit."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliae: H. 458, 3; LM. 593; A. 223, a\ G. 407, n. d; B. 212, 2;(H. 410, V. 3). What other construction does potior admit? See imperio potiri, p. 57, 1. 6.	,What instances of the subjunctive have we found in this chapter? What is the object of Orgetorix? Is he meeting with any success?"

"pro multitudine autem hominum et pro gloria belli atque fortitudinis angustos se fines habere arbitrabantur, qui in longitudinem MILIA PASSUUM ccxl, in latitudinem clxxx patebant."|"milia passuum CCXL, etc.: mille passuum is a little more than nine tenths of an English mile, which makes the length about 220 miles and the breadth about 160. Caesar***s estimate is, however, somewhat too high, resting doubtless on the exaggerated accounts of others."

"quibus abscisis antemnae necessario concidebant, ut, CUM OMNIS gallicis navibus spes in velis armamentisque consisteret, his ereptis omnis usus navium uno tempore eriperetur."|"cum omnis Gallicis navibus spes, etc.: since the entire dependence of the Gallic vessels, etc.; navibus: dative of relation, depending on consisteret."

"QUARUM RERUM magnam partem temporis brevitas et incursus hostium impediebat."|"quarum rerum omnium casus: the peril attending all these things."

"NOT FOUND"|"quin ... coicerent: from hurling, etc.,.lit. by which they should not hurl; see sibi . . . temperaturos . . . quin , ,. exirent, p. 81,1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"P. Sextio Baculo: for other services of this brave centurion, see iii, 5; vi> 38."

"hac oratione adducti inter se fidem et ius iurandum dant et REGNO OCCUPATO per tres potentissimos ac firmissimos populos totius galliae sese potiri posse sperant."|"regno occupato:, if they should seize the sovereignty ; ablative absolute. What other instances of the ablative absolute have we noticed?"

"cuius adventu spe inlata militibus ac redintegrato animo, cum PRO SE quisque in conspectu imperatoris etiam in extremis suis rebus operam navare cuperet, paulum hostium impetus tardatus est."|"pro se quisque : each one for himself i.e. irrespective of the others."

"NOT FOUND"|"plures: several, i.e. of the enemy."

"haec cum animadvertisset, convocato consilio omniumque ordinum ad id consilium adhibitis centurionibus, vehementer eos incusavit: primum, quod aut quam in partem aut quo consilio ducerentur SIBI QUAERENDUM aut cogitandum putarent."|"sibi quaerendum: that it was necessary for them to inquire."

"dum ea conquiruntur et conferuntur, [nocte intermissa] circiter hominum milia vi eius pagi qui verbigenus appellatur, sive TIMORE PERTERRITI, ne armis traditis supplicio adficerentur, sive spe salutis inducti, quod in tanta multitudine dediticiorum suam fugam aut occultari aut omnino ignorari posse existimarent, prima nocte e castris helvetiorum egressi ad rhenum finesque germanorum contenderunt."|"timore perterriti ne: fearing that, lit. terrified with fear lest: perterriti by a construction according to sense takes the gender of the men constituting milia, with which we should expect it to agree."

"quam ob rem placuit ei ut ad ariovistum legatos mitteret, qui ab eo postularent uti aliquem LOCUM MEDIUM utrisque conloquio deligeret: velle sese de re publica et summis utriusque rebus cum eo agere."|"locum medium utriusque: a place midway between the two camps: utriusque depends upon the adjective medium, which here follows the anal- ogy of particeps, etc. H. 451, 2; LM. 573; A. 218; G. 374; B. 204, 1; (H. 399, 3)-velle sese: that he wished. This depends on a verb of saying implied in postularent."

"NOT FOUND"|"eorum, sese; these pronouns both refer to the Haedui."

"adiuvabat etiam eorum consilium qui rem deferebant quod nervii antiquitus, cum equitatu nihil possent (neque enim ad hoc tempus ei rei student, sed quicquid possunt, pedestribus valent copiis), quo facilius finitimorum equitatum, si praedandi causa ad eos venissent, impedirent, TENERIS ARBORIBUS incisis atque inflexis crebrisque in latitudinem ramis enatis [et] rubis sentibusque interiectis effecerant ut instar muri hae saepes munimentum praeberent, quo non modo non intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset."|"teneris arboribus .. . interiectis: by heading down young trees and intertwining (inflexis) the numerous branches (crebris ramis) which grew out in a lateral direction (in latitudinem enatis), and by allowing brambles and briers to entwine themselves among them, lit. brambles and briers having been inserted between. The ablatives are all absolute."

"quae ubi convenit ac primum ab hostibus visa est, circiter ccxx naves eorum paratissimae atque omni genere armorum ornatissimae PROFECTAE EX portu nostris adversae constiterunt;  neque satis bruto, qui classi praeerat, vel tribunis militum centurionibusque, quibus singulae naves erant attributae, constabat quid agerent aut quam rationem pugnae insisterent."|"profectae ex portu ... constiterunt: this naval battle is supposed to have been fought in the bay of Quiberon, off the heights of St. Gildas, which were occupied by the Roman army; see plan in the text."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAre .. . intercludi: like proelio abstinebat, p. 71,1. 24."

"ubi vineis actis aggere extructo turrim procul constitui viderunt, primum inridere ex muro atque increpitare vocibus, quod tanta machinatio a tanto spatio institueretur:  QUIBUSNAM MANIBUS aut quibus viribus praesertim homines tantulae staturae (nam plerumque omnibus gallis prae magnitudine corporum quorum brevitas nostra contemptui est) tanti oneris turrim in muro sese posse conlocare confiderent?"|"Quibusnam manibus: note the sarcasm contained in Quibusnam, with what hands, pray ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"removeri, submoveri: removere means to remove, referring simply to a change of position; submovere, to dislodge, drive away."

"NOT FOUND"|"What effect did Caesar***s speech have on the soldiers?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Notice again that the principal clauses of the indirect discourse take the infinitive, with a subject expressed or implied, and that all the other clauses take the subjunctive. Are all these subjunctives to be explained in the same way? Compare and explain utantur and potuerint. How many of these subjunctives represent the subjunctive in the direct discourse? All such subjunctives are to be explained, not by the indirect discourse, but by the principles which would apply to them in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Galliam ulteriorem: into Ulterior or Farther Gaul, i.e. Gaul beyond or west of the Alps; also called Gallia Transalpina, or simply Gallia, as on p. 56, 1. 4."

"NOT FOUND"|"cedentes: them retreating or in their retreat'."

"NOT FOUND"|"11. sibi . . . fecisset: would give them security by an oath, i.e. that they would receive them into their territory, as Caesar had promised; see p. 150,6; fecisset: future perfect in direct discourse."

"quare ne committeret ut is locus UBI CONSTITISSENT ex calamitate populi romani et internecione exercitus nomen caperet aut memoriam proderet."|"ubi constitissent: subordinate clause, indirect discourse; see id si Jieret, p. 62, 1. 19."

"NOT FOUND"|"aequo spatio: ablative of distance. H. 417, 3; LM. 655; A. 257 b; G. 403; B. 223; (H. 423, N. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What tidings did Caesar receive from Crassus?"

"boios petentibus haeduis, quod EGREGIA VIRTUTE erant cogniti, ut in finibus suis conlocarent, concessit; quibus illi agros dederunt quosque postea in parem iuris libertatisque condicionem atque ipsi erant receperunt."|"egregia virtute: men of remarkable courage; ablative of characteristic."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 112, line 1, Chapter 18. *** Loci . . . quern locum: H. 399, 1; LM. 822; A. 200, a; G. 615; B. 251, 3; (H. 445, 8). erat haec: was as follows, lit. this."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. quam concesserat, qui impenderent: note the difference in mood. The indicative could have been used in both, and then both clauses would have been treated as independent statements; or the subjunctive could have been used in both, and then both clauses would have been treated as parts of the general narrative. The indicative in quam concesserat emphasizes the fact that he had actually granted it to the Gauls, while qui impenderent follows the general rule. Moreover, montes may be regarded as an indefinite antecedent, as only those mountains which overhung the valley were occupied."

"NOT FOUND"|"domo: ablative of separation. H. 462, 4; LM. 608; A. 258, a;390, 2; B. 229, 1; (H. 412, 11, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo: note the omission of the preposition, expressed before eo loco."

"quod ubi caesar animadvertit, naves longas, quarum et species erat barbaris inusitatior et motus ad usum expeditior, paulum removeri ab onerariis navibus et remis incitari et AD LATUS apertum hostium constitui atque inde fundis, sagittis, tormentis hostes propelli ac submoveri iussit; quae res magno usui nostris fuit."|"ad latus apertum; on the right flank, not protected by their shields."

"ab eo flumine pari acclivitate collis nascebatur adversus huic et contrarius, passus circiter cc INFIMUS APERTUS, ab superiore parte silvestris, ut non facile introrsus perspici posset."|"infimus apertus: clear at its base ; infimus and apertus are both adjectives agreeing with collis, but the first only specifies the part to which the other is applicable, as infimus collis means the lowest part of the hill or its base. H. 497, 4; LM. 565; A. 193; G. 291, r. 2; B. 241, 15 (H. 440, 2, N. 1)."

"hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus INTER SE differunt."|"inter se dant: they (Casticus, Dumnorix, and Orgetorix) exchange, lit. give between (among) themselves; dant, historical present."

"NOT FOUND"|"tanti: of so great value, genitive of price. H. 448, I; LM. 576; A. 252, a\ G. 380; B. 203, 3; (H. 404)."

"NOT FOUND"|"How did the Nervii treat the suggestion of the deserters? What fact added weight to that suggestion?"

"postquam omnes belgarum copias in unum locum coactas ad se venire vidit neque iam longe abesse ab iis quos miserat exploratoribus et ab remis cognovit, flumen axonam, quod est IN EXTREMIS remorum finibus, exercitum traducere maturavit atque ibi castra posuit."|"in extremis suis rebus : in his own extreme peril."

"his rebus atque auditionibus permoti de summis saepe rebus consilia ineunt, QUORUM EOS in vestigio paenitere necesse est, cum incertis rumoribus serviant et pleri ad voluntatem eorum ficta respondeant."|"quorum eos: H.457; LM. 585; A.221,b; G. 377; B.209; (H.409, III)."

"NOT FOUND"|"hora . .. quarta: in the last week in August the fourth hour would begin at about 8.30 a.m."

"caesari omnia uno tempore erant agenda: vexillum proponendum, quod erat insigne, cum ad arma concurri oporteret; SIGNUM TUBA dandum; ab opere revocandi milites; qui paulo longius aggeris petendi causa processerant arcessendi; acies instruenda; milites cohortandi; signum dandum."|"signum tuba dandum: the signal was to be given with the trumpet. This, like the vexillum, was also the signal to prepare for action; the one was addressed to the eye and the other to the ear; see 105."

"quod si veteris contumeliae oblivisci vellet, num etiam recentium iniuriarum, quod EO INvito iter per provinciam per vim temptassent, quod haeduos, quod ambarros, quod allobrogas vexassent, memoriam deponere posse?"|"eo: in or for that war."

"NOT FOUND"|"compluribus: very many, i.e. of the enemy."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numQUAM INterdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"quam in partem: in what direction."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 34. *** Quibus rebus: under these circumstances. Note the accumulation of ablatives in this sentence and explain their use."

"NOT FOUND"|"incusavit: incusare means to censure, find fault with; accusare, to accuse, prefer an accusation, as in a court of justice."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod EO CONSILIO florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"eo consilio: with this design, explained by the clause of purpose, uti ... potirentur... haberent."

"quod si quid ei a caesare gravius accidisset, cum ipse eum locum amicitiae apud eum teneret, neminem existimaturum non sua voluntate factum; qua ex re FUTURUM UTI totius galliae animi a se averterentur."|"futurum uti .. . averterentur: that the feelings of all the Gauls would be estranged from him; periphrastic future infinitive. H. 619, 2; LM. 984; A. 288,/; G. 248; B. 270, 3; (H. 537, 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"tormenta: see 109."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod . . . missa: these clauses explain beneficia, and are in apposition with it."

"NOT FOUND"|"totae ... ex robore: made wholly of oak. H. 497; A. 191; G. 325, R. 6; B. 239; (H. 443)."

"NOT FOUND"|"1 a cis Rhenum: on this side of the Rhine, i.e. the southern or Gallic side, on which several German tribes had settled."

"NOT FOUND"|"dies: duration of time. H. 417; LM. 513; A. 256; G. 336; B, 181;(H. 379)-nostrum primum: our van."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 13. *** primis civitatis: the chief men of the state."

"NOT FOUND"|"commemorassent: attracted into the subjunctive by teneret. H. 652; LM. 793; A. 342; G. 663, 1; B. 324; (H. 529, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this example of indirect discourse with that noticed in the last chapter. What moods do you find in each? Remember, however, that a subjunctive in a subordinate clause which would require that mood in the direct discourse should be referred to the law which would govern it in that discourse. Thus prohibuerint is a potential subjunctive in a relative clause of result in the direct as well as in the indirect form, and should be so treated. Thus, too, sumerent is in the subjunctive, not because it is in the indirect discourse, but because it is a potential subjunctive in a substantive clause of result, which is the subject of fieri; but incolerent is in the subjunctive simply because it is in the indirect discourse, as the indicative would be used in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hos: object of expell&re."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 18. *** Diebus: construe with traducitur."

"PROXIMUS MARE oceanum in andibus hiemabat."|"proximus mare Oceanum: very near the ocean, i.e. the Atlantic; proximus admits either the dative or the accusative; see proximique sunt Germanis, p. 55, 1. 10, and proximi Rhenum incolunt, p. 98, 1. I."

"c. ivli caesaris commentariorvm de bello gallico liber primvs gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt belgae, aliam aquitani, TERTIAM QUI ipsorum lingua celtae, nostra galli appellantur."|"tertiam qui: =tertiam partem incolunt ii qui. H. 399, 4; LM. 823; A. 200, c; G. 621; B. 251, I; (H. 445, 6)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 33. *** sibi .. . curae futuram: that he 7vould attend to this business ; see auxilio Caesari, p. 69, 1. 6. Note that pollicitus est here takes the future infinitive, the regular construction with verbs of promising."

"NOT FOUND"|"Accessit: an additional reason was."

"qui cum se suaque omnia in oppidum bratuspantium contulissent atque ab eo oppido caesar cum exercitu circiter milia passuum v abesset, omnes MAIORES NATU ex oppido egressi manus ad caesarem tendere et voce significare coeperunt sese in eius fidem ac potestatem venire neque contra populum romanum armis contendere."|"maiores natu: the elders, lit those greater by birth or in age. H. 480; LM. 650; A. 253; G. 397; B. 226, i; (H. 424)."

"NOT FOUND"|"7. Chapter 17. *** qui . . . deligant: purpose; see qui deduceret, p. 99, 1. 19; castris: see 91."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 20. *** Caesari: apparent agent; see sibi, p. in, 1. 29."

"si quid accidat romanis, SUMMAM IN spem per helvetios regni obtinendi venire; imperio populi romani non modo de regno, sed etiam de ea quam habeat gratia desperare."|"summam in spem venire: that he entertained the highest hopes, lit. came into the highest hope."

"HIC PAGUS unus, cum domo exisset, patrum nostrorum memoria l. cassium consulem interfecerat et eius exercitum sub iugum miserat."|"Hic pagus unus: this one canton. It probably occupied the district in which Bern and Freiburg are now situated."

"ad haec caesar quae visum est respondit; sed exitus fuit orationis: sibi nullam cum iis amicitiam esse posse, si in gallia remanerent;  neque verum esse, qui suos fines tueri non potuerint alienos occupare; neque ullos in gallia vacare agros qui dari tantae praesertim multitudini sine iniuria possint;  sed licere, si velint, in ubiorum finibus considere, quorum sint legati apud se et de sueborum iniuriis querantur et a se auxilium petant: HOC SE ubiis imperaturus."|"9. hoc se: se is the subject and hoc the object of the infinitive imperaturum; hoc : this, viz. to admit the Germans into their territory."

"NOT FOUND"|"quare .. . animadverteret: why he should either himself punish him; subjunctive of characteristic; see quibus . . . possent, p. 59, 1. 15."

"caesari renuntiatur helvetiis esse in animo per agrum sequanorum et haeduorum iter in santonum fines facere, qui non longe a tolosatium finibus absunt, QUAE CIVITAS est in provincia."|"quae civitas: a Latin idiom, meaning a state which."

"NOT FOUND"|"ituros: future infinitive."

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui INGENTI MAGNITUDINE corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit ut non mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"ingenti magnitudine : predicate ablative of characteristic. Compare magna altitudine, an attributive ablative of characteristic, line 6 above."

"NOT FOUND"|"Tarbelli ... Cocosates: see Map and Vocabulary. Notice the form which some of these names take in modern French, as Tarbest Bigorre, Auchy Garonnc'y etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"proximi . *** *** Belgis: the nearest of the Belgae to Gaul, i.e. to Celtic Gaul. The dative depends on proximi; see finitimi Belgis, p. 100, 1. 3. On ex Belgis, see H. 444; LM. 563; A. 216, c; G. 372, r. 2; B. 201, 1, a; (H. 397** N. 3)**qui dicerent: to say ; see note on qui deduceret, p. 99,1. 19."

"ea disiecta gladiis destrictis IN EOS impetum fecerunt."|"in eos .. . edere: that he practices upon them all kinds of torture."

"NOT FOUND"|"vestitus: construe with quicquam."

"factum eius hostis periculum patrum nostrorum memoria cimbris et teutonis a c. mario pulsis [CUM NON minorem laudem exercitus quam ipse imperator meritus videbatur]; factum etiam nuper in italia servili tumultu, quos tamen aliquid usus ac disciplina, quam a nobis accepissent, sublevarint."|"cum . . . non potuissent: subjunctive of cause. Note the order of thought: since our men had not been able to pursue them, as they had delayed (having delayed) three days, both on account of the wounds of the soldiers and for the burial of the dead. This long delay on the part of the Romans, for the reasons here assigned, seems to show that Caesar***s loss in this battle was very heavy."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 140, line 1.***nostri: subject of cuperent."

"NOT FOUND"|"deminuta: supply sit from the next line."

"NOT FOUND"|"moenibus: indirect object of circumiecta. H. 429, 2; LM. 534;228; G. 348; B. 187, III; (H. 386, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"num . . . posse: remember that interrogative clauses in the indirect discourse generally take the subjunctive. For the infinitive, see H. 642, 2; LM. 1024; A. 338; G. 651, R.; B. 315, 2; (H. 523, II, 2).	^iniuriarum: construe with memoriam below."

"NOT FOUND"|"Belgas: is the subject of the infinitives coniurare and dare. H. 415; LM. 959 ; A. 240,/; G. 343, 2 ; B. 184; (H. 536)."

"NOT FOUND"|"10. alienum, suo: see note on alieno loco, p. 66,1. 14."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... fecissent: reason assigned by the envoys; hence the subjunctive, because as barbarians unacquainted with our customs, etc.: homines, in apposition with the omitted subject of fecissent. H. 393,2; (H..363,2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"quas . . *** nuntiet: indirect discourse; write it in the direct form."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 160, line 1. *** coactis contractisque: secured and brought together, but coactis may mean pressed into service."

"his constitutis rebus et consilio cum legatis et quaestore communicato, ne quem diem pugnae praetermitteret, oportunissima res accidit, quod postridie eius diei mane eadem et perfidia et simulatione usi germani frequentes, omnibus principibus maioribusque natu adhibitis, ad eum in castra venerunt,  simul, ut dicebatur, sui purgandi causa, quod CONTRA ATQUE esset dictum et ipsi petissent, proelium pridie commisissent, simul ut, si quid possent, de indutiis fallendo impetrarent."|"contra atque esset dictum: contrary to what had been agreed upon. esset dictum, attracted into the subjunctive by commisissent."

"NOT FOUND"|"16. simul... suis omnibus consecutis: as soon as ... and all their comrades had joined them. The ablative absolute, suis ... consecutis, is thus best rendered by an independent clause."

"NOT FOUND"|"secundum . . . fluminis : according to the current (nature) of the river, i.e. down the stream."

"NOT FOUND"|"inde: from their position."

"NOT FOUND"|"reminisceretur: in the direct discourse we should have the imperative,reminiscere. H. 642, 4; LM. 1023; A. 339; G. 652; B. 316; (H. 523, III)."

"cum ex dediticiis belgis reliquisque gallis complures caesarem secuti una iter facerent, quidam ex his, ut postea ex captivis cognitum est, eorum dierum consuetudine itineris nostri exercitus perspecta, nocte ad nervios pervenerunt atque his demonstrarunt inter singulas legiones impedimentorum magnum numerum intercedere, neque ESSE QUICQUAM negotii, cum prima legio in castra venisset reliquaeque legiones magnum spatium abessent, hanc sub sarcinis adoriri;  qua pulsa impedimentisque direptis, futurum ut reliquae contra consistere non auderent."|"esse quicquam: the subject of esse is hanc sub sarcinis adoriri; quicquam is predicate after esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES***BOOK I, 12-14ne suae . . . tribueret: he should not ascribe it particularly to his own valor. For ne tribueret, we should have in the direct discourse, noli with the infinitive, noli tribuere."

"eodem tempore a p. crasso, quem cum legione una miserat ad venetos, venellos, osismos, coriosolitas, esuvios, aulercos, redones, quae sunt MARITIMAE CIVITATES oceanumque attingunt, certior factus est omnes eas civitates in dicionem potestatemque populi romani esse redactas."|"maritimae civitates: maritime states, situated in the northwestern part of Celtic Gaul, now Brittany and Normandy."

"NOT FOUND"|"How large a force of cavalry did Caesar probably have ? see 60."

"NOT FOUND"|"-w clientes: dependents, i.e. dependent states."

"nam hoc toto proelio, cum ab HORA SEPTIMA ad vesperum pugnatum sit, aversum hostem videre nemo potuit."|"hora septima: in Roman time the seventh hour was from 12 m. till 1 p.m. approximately."

"populi romani HANC ESSE consuetudinem, ut socios atque amicos non modo sui nihil deperdere, sed gratia, dignitate, honore auctiores velit esse; quod vero ad amicitiam populi romani attulissent, id iis eripi quis pati posset?"|"hanc esse *** . . Ut *** . . vellet esse: that this was the custom that they (the Roman people), wished, etc.; hanc refers to the clause, ut... vellet esse, and is explained by it. The pronoun, which would otherwise have been hoc, is attracted to hanc to agree with consuetudinem."

"QUIN ETIAM, quod necessariam rem coactus caesari enuntiarit, intellegere sese quanto id cum periculo fecerit, et ob eam causam quam diu potuerit tacuisse."|"Quin etiam: nay even, moreover, adding a stronger expression to what has been said."

"NOT FOUND"|"obstrictas: attached to himself What is the force of ob in compounds ? H. 374** 9; A. 170, a; (H. 344, 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"civitatum: construe with summam imperii."

"NOT FOUND"|"inridere: H. 610; LM. 708; A. 275; G. 647; B. 335; (H. 536, 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"diei: construction? see postridie eius diei, p. 72, 1. I."

"NOT FOUND"|"ne . . . circumvenirentur: object clause after timerent, that they should be assailed by the enemy in the rear."

"NOT FOUND"|"agri Sequani: the territory of Sequani lay between the Sa8ne, the Rhone, the Jura, and the Rhine. It thus comprised the southern part of Alsace, and was very fertile."

"NOT FOUND"|"His : over these; indirect object of praefecit."

"NOT FOUND"|"22. collis adversus: the hill on the side opposite the enemy ; adversus designates the side (of the hill) facing the enemy; it agrees with collis. H.497, 4; LM. 565; G. 291, r. 2; B. 241, 1; (H. 449 2, N. 1).23. tantum quantum loci: as much space as; loci, partitive genitive with quantum, though in translating we connect it with tantum. H. 4^2; LM. 560; A. 216, a; G. 369; B. 201, 2; (H. 397, 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"complerentur: note the force of the imperfect, were filling, beginning to fill."

"hos cum suebi multis saepe bellis experti propter AMPLITUDINEM GRAVITATEM civitatis finibus expellere non potuissent, tamen vectigales sibi fecerunt ac multo humiliores infirmiores redegerunt."|"amplitudinem gravitatemque : size and importance."

"quare NE COMMITTERET ut is locus ubi constitissent ex calamitate populi romani et internecione exercitus nomen caperet aut memoriam proderet."|"ne committeret... caperet: he should not cause the place (lit. that place) where they had taken their stand\ to receive (lit. should receive) a name from the overthrow of the Roman people, etc."

"nam quod hostibus adpropinquabat, consuetudine sua caesar vi legiones expeditas ducebat;  post eas totius exercitus impedimenta conlocarat; inde DUAE LEGIONES quae proxime conscriptae erant totum agmen claudebant praesidioque impedimentis erant."|"duae legiones: these were the xm and xiv, mentioned in chapter 2."

"NOT FOUND"|"quorum: the antecedent is nobilibus principibusque."

"NOT FOUND"|"Noviodunum: see Vocabulary. The Celtic word Novio-dunum means New Town or Newton, dunum: town, is a common element in Celtic names of towns. The modern name of this city, Soissons, is derived from the name of the people, Suessiones."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 89, line 1. *** Ubi ventum est: when they came ; impersonal in Latin."

"NOT FOUND"|"Disturbance among the Morini and the Menapii, 37, 3815. Chapter 37.*** Quibus ex navibus: from these two vessels, i.e. the two transports just mentioned."

"NOT FOUND"|"8. priores . . . ponerent: and those in the van placed, etc. Notice thatOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARthis clause, like cum . . . consisterent, is also causal, and that the sentence from cum explains the cause of the great slaughter, magnam multitudinem conciderunt."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent SIBI ESSE in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"sibi esse . . . facere liceat: indirect discourse, object of dicerent."

"NOT FOUND"|"munera missa: presents were often sent to those upon whom the senate conferred the title of king."

"eo concilio dimisso, idem princeps civitatum QUI ANTE fuerant ad caesarem reverterunt petieruntque uti sibi secreto in occulto de sua omniumque salute cum eo agere liceret."|"qui ante fuerant: who had been with him before."

"NOT FOUND"|"fugae: H. 434; LM. 536; A. 234; G. 359; B. 192, 1; (H. 391)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 2. *** magis eo, ut: more on this account thatvendant, habeant: purpose. The object of vendant is the omitted antecedent of quae, and the object of habeant the omitted antecedent of quibus."

"cum illi ORBE FACTO sese defenderent, celeriter ad clamorem hominum circiter milia vi convenerunt; qua re nuntiata, caesar omnem ex castris equitatum suis auxilio misit."|"orbe facto: having formed a circle. Thus, though surrounded, they presented a front to the enemy on every side."

"NOT FOUND"|"agri: construe with nihil."

"quibus omnibus rebus permoti equites treveri, quorum inter gallos virtutis opinio est singularis, qui auxilii causa a civitate missi ad caesarem venerant, CUM MULTITUDINE hostium castra [nostra] compleri, legiones premi et paene circumventas teneri, calones, equites, funditores, numidas diversos dissipatosque in omnes partes fugere vidissent, desperatis nostris rebus domum contenderunt:  romanos pulsos superatosque, castris impedimentisque eorum hostes potitos civitati renuntiaverunt."|"cum . . . multitudine: construe with dimicandum."

"NOT FOUND"|"tamen: yet, i.e. although he attempted to make a sally."

"NOT FOUND"|"What was the complaint of the Haedui? What of the Treveri?"

"NOT FOUND"|"institui: to be obtained; comparari: to be prepared, selected. The sailors and pilots must be selected with some care."

"NOT FOUND"|"io. eorum dierum . . . perspecta: having observed our army's usual order in marching during those days. Note the accumulation of genitives."

"NOT FOUND"|"consuetudine: they had learned from Sertorius the Roman mode of warfare."

"NOT FOUND"|"How many legions had Caesar in this battle? What disposition did he make of them? Where did he station his auxiliaries?"

"NOT FOUND"|"poterant: why indicative? H. 652, I; LM. 1028; A. 342, a; B. 324; (H. 529, II, N. 1). pugnantes suos: his men while fighting."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 4. *** Ea res: this conspiracy; res is a favorite word with Latin writers, and has a wide range of meaning, as thing, object, actionfact, event, and, indeed, whatever is at the time the subject of discussion. Render it by the word which best suits the context; see Vocabulary."

"NOT FOUND"|"earn partem Oceani: now the Bay of Biscay."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent SIBI ESSE in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"sibi esse in animo: that it was their intention] lit. was to them in mind; sibi, dative of possessor with esse. Observe that esse and rogare are the leading verbs in the principal clauses. The subject of esse is the clause sine ullo ... iter ... facere."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites QUOS IMPERAVERAT convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: si quid vellent, ad id."|"quos imperaverat: see note on provinciae toti imperat, line 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 141, line 3, Chapter 23. *** oppidum: subject of the infinitive expugnatum without esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"According to Caesar***s account, the Germans were guilty of the basest violation of good faith. It is entirely possible, however, that Caesar was deceived, and suspected treachery when none was really intended. Some have even supposed that he availed himself of this attack upon his cavalry as an excuse for destroying the Germans."

"hic cum fratri intercluso ab hostibus auxilium ferret, illum ex periculo eripuit, ipse equo vulnerato deiectus, QUOAD POTUIT, fortissime restitit;  cum circumventus multis vulneribus acceptis cecidisset atque id frater, qui iam proelio excesserat, procul animadvertisset, incitato equo se hostibus obtulit atque interfectus est."|"quoad potuit: why not subjunctive, like accessisset, p. 151,1. 22."

"NOT FOUND"|"Bibracte: an important city of the Haedui, now Autun. H. 418; LM. 515; A. 258, b; G. 337; B. 182; (H. 380, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"NI23Expedition into Britain, 20-36Chapter 20. *** parte aestatis reliqua: ablative absolute, denoting time or concession."

"EX EO oppido pons ad helvetios pertinet."|"ex eo: from him."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why did Caesar send Procillus and Metius, rather than two native Romans, as envoys to Ariovistus?"

"dumnorix gratia et largitione apud sequanos plurimum poterat et helvetiis erat amicus, quod ex ea civitate orgetorigis filiam in matrimonium duxerat, et cupiditate regni adductus NOVIS REBUS studebat et quam plurimas civitates suo beneficio habere obstrictas volebat."|"Novis rebus studebat: was eager for a revolution, lit. for new things."

"is m. messala, [et p.] m. pisone consulibus regni cupiditate inductus coniurationem nobilitatis fecit et civitati persuasit ut de finibus suis cum omnibus copiis exirent:  perfacile esse, cum virtute omnibus praestarent, totius galliae IMPERIO POTIRI."|"imperio potiri: H. 477, 1; LM. 646; A 249; G. 407; B. 218, 1; (H. 421,1)."

"rhenus autem oritur ex lepontiis, qui alpes incolunt, et longo spatio per fines nantuatium, helvetiorum, sequanorum, mediomatricorum, tribocorum, treverorum citatus fertur et,  ubi oceano adpropinquavit, in plures diffluit partes multis ingentibus INSULIS EFFECTIS, quarum pars magna a feris barbaris nationibus incolitur,  ex quibus sunt qui piscibus atque ovis avium vivere existimantur, multis capitibus in oceanum influit.]"|"insulis effectis: forming islands, lit. islands having been formed."

"NOT FOUND"|"his (i.e. aggere ac molibus). . *** adaequatis: when these equalled the walls in height."

"hunc esse delectum medium fere regionum earum quas suebi obtinerent; hic romanorum adventum expectare atque IBI DECERTARE constituisse."|"ibi decertare: there to fight the decisive battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"urgeri, esse: these infinitives and several others depend on vidit."

"NOT FOUND"|"12. insuefactos: trained to this service."

"provinciae toti quam maximum potest militum numerum imperat (erat omnino in gallia ulteriore LEGIO UNA), pontem, qui erat ad genavam, iubet rescindi."|"legio una: this was the tenth legion, afterward famous in the Gallic wars. For an account of the legion, of its organization and numerical strength, see 58 and 63."

"NOT FOUND"|"consequi: note the force of con in this word, to pursue successfully, overtake."

"cum ab his saepius quaereret neque ullam omnino vocem exprimere posset, idem diviacus haeduus respondit:  HOC ESSE miseriorem et graviorem fortunam sequanorum quam reliquorum, quod soli ne in occulto quidem queri neque auxilium implorare auderent absentisque ariovisti crudelitatem,  velut si coram adesset, horrerent, propterea quod reliquis tamen fugae facultas daretur, sequanis vero, qui intra fines suos ariovistum recepissent, quorum oppida omnia in potestate eius essent, omnes cruciatus essent perferendi."|"Hoc esse, etc.: Direct discourse:Hoc est miserior et gravior fortuna Sequanorum quam reliquorum, quod soli ne in occulto quidem queri neque auxilium implorare audent absentisque Ariovisti crudelitatem, velut si coram adsit, horrent, propterea quod reliquis tamen fugae facultas datur, Sequanis vero, qui intra fines suos Ariovistum receperunt, quorum oppida omnia in potestate eius sunt; omnes cruciatus sunt perferendi."

"coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne, OMNI PACATA gallia, ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur;  deinde quod ab non nullis gallis sollicitarentur, partim qui, ut germanos diutius in gallia versari noluerant, ita populi romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in gallia moleste ferebant, partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis imperiis studebant;  ab non nullis etiam quod in gallia a potentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant vulgo regna occupabantur; qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant."|"omni pacata Gallia: if all Gaul (i.e. Gaul in its restricted sense, Celtic Gaul) should be subdued, H. 489, I; LM. 640; A. 255; G. 410; B. 227; (H. 431, 2)."

"quin etiam, quod necessariam rem coactus caesari enuntiarit, INTELLEGERE SESE quanto id cum periculo fecerit, et ob eam causam quam diu potuerit tacuisse."|"intellegere sese: the subject is sese and the object quanto . .. fecerit, an indirect question. Note the emphatic position of quanto before id, the object of fecerit."

"NOT FOUND"|"sese . . . vellent:_indirecj discourse. Direct form as follows: Habemus quasdam res quas ex communi consensu abs te petere volumus; explain the changes."

"milites non longiore oratione cohortatus quam uti suae pristinae virtutis memoriam retinerent neu perturbarentur animo hostiumque impetum fortiter sustinerent,  quod non longius hostes aberant QUAM QUO telum adigi posset, proelii committendi signum dedit."|"quam quo: than, lit. than whither, i.e. than to the point to which."

"QUO PROELIO sublati helvetii, quod quingentis equitibus tantam multitudinem equitum propulerant, audacius subsistere non numquam et novissimo agmine proelio nostros lacessere coeperunt."|"Quo proelio: by this battle; note this use of the relative; see note on qua de causa, p. 55, 1. 12. *quod . . . propulerant: Caesar***s reason, 4S shown by the indicative."

"NOT FOUND"|"virtute: name another instance of an ablative of this kind, omnibus: H. 429; LM. 532; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III; (H. 386). praestarent: why in the subjunctive? H.598; LM.858; A.326; G.586;286, 2; (H. 517)."

"NOT FOUND"|"pollicitos . . . postulare: notice difference in tense."

"quae ubi convenit ac primum ab hostibus visa est, circiter ccxx naves eorum paratissimae atque OMNI GENERE armorum ornatissimae profectae ex portu nostris adversae constiterunt;  neque satis bruto, qui classi praeerat, vel tribunis militum centurionibusque, quibus singulae naves erant attributae, constabat quid agerent aut quam rationem pugnae insisterent."|"omni genere ... ornatissimae: most thoroughly furnished with every kind of equipment."

"NOT FOUND"|"legioni: dative of interest."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut fidem sequantur: to seek the protection."

"NOT FOUND"|"by GoogleN 17magno cam periculo . . . futurum ut, etc.: that it would be attended with great peril to the province to have (that it should have) as neighbors (finitimos), etc. The subject of the infinitive futurum is the clause ut homines *** ***. haberet, a subject clause of result; see note on ut. .. possent, p. 57,1.14."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 163, line 2. *** in continentem: i.e. to Gaul."

"FUTURUM ESSE paucis annis uti omnes ex galliae finibus pellerentur atque omnes germani rhenum transirent; neque enim conferendum esse gallicum cum germanorum agro neque hanc consuetudinem victus cum illa comparandam."|"Futurum esse ... uti... pellerentur ... comparandum: Direct discourse :Paucis annis omnes ex Galliae finibus pellentur atque omnes Germani Rhenum transibunt; neque enim conferendus est Gallicus cum Germanorum agro neque haec consuetudo victus cum illa comparanda."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 5. *** mobiles: hasty, impulsive."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, QUI DICERENT sibi esse in animo sine ullo maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"qui dicerent: subjunctive by indirect discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum . . . videbatur: when the army appeared to have deserved no less praise than the commander himself etc. This use of the imperfect indicative with cum is the only example of the kind in the Gallic War, and here it stands in the midst of a long passage of indirect discourse. Its use is perhaps explained by the twofold fact that videbar with the infinitive is sometimes nearly equivalent to the subjunctive of the dependent verb, and that Caesar wished to emphasize as strongly as possible the fact stated in the temporal clause."

"NOT FOUND"|"priusquam . . . faceret: before he would make the attempt."

"NOT FOUND"|"28. P. Crassus: called adulescens, the younger, to distinguish him from his father, Marcus Licinius Crassus, who was triumvir with Caesar and Pompey.CAESAR***S GALLIC WAR	[Rages	96,quod expeditior erat: because he was less busily engaged,. As he commanded the cavalry, which consisted entirely of auxiliaries, he seems not fo have been actively engaged in the battle."

"NOT FOUND"|"Axona: see Vocabulary."

"ad haec cognoscenda, prius quam periculum faceret, IDONEUM ESSE arbitratus c. volusenum cum navi longa praemittit."|"idoneum esse arbitratus: thinking him to be a suitable person,Volusenum: see p. 128,1. 16."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallia omnis: Gaul as a whole. Gallia, 0** Gallia Transalpina, properly designates that part of the continent of Europe which lies west of the Alps and the Rhine, and north of the Pyrenees; but, as here used, it does not include the Roman province (provincia) in the southeastern portion of this district. In a still more restricted sense, Gallia is sometimes used to designate one of the three general divisions of this country, namely, that occupied by the Celtae or Galli. Gallia omnis distinguishes the country, as a whole, from this part."

"NOT FOUND"|"What important grammatical constructions have you noticed in the last two chapters?"

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi pro veteribus helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus EX USU [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"ex usu: to the advantage of lit. from use, very much like the English of use."

"NOT FOUND"|"471; LM. 615; A. 247; G. 398; B. 217; (H. 417)."

"NOT FOUND"|"cupere Helvetiis: H. 426, 4, n. ; A. 227, c; G. 346, r. 2 ; (H. 385,1)."

"perfacile factu esse illis probat conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  NON ESSE dubium quin totius galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"non esse dubium quin . *** . possent: notice that the negative expression of doubt is followed by quin with the subjunctive. H. 595, 1; LM. 913; A. 319, d\G. 555, 2; B. 284, 3; (H. 504)."

"pugnatum est diu atque acriter, cum sotiates superioribus victoriis freti in sua virtute totius aquitaniae salutem positam putarent, nostri autem quid sine imperatore et sine reliquis legionibus adulescentulo duce efficere possent PERSPICI CUPERENT; tandem confecti vulneribus hostes terga verterunt."|"perspici cuperent: wished it to be seen. The subject of perspici is the indirect question, quid ... possent, and the object of cuperent is the infinitive clause, quid sine ... perspici."

"quod cum fieret, non inridicule quidam ex militibus x. legionis dixit: plus quam pollicitus esset caesarem facere; pollicitum se in cohortis praetoriae loco x. legionem habiturum AD EQUUM rescribere."|"20. ad equum rescribere: that he was transferring them to the cavalry. Perhaps the wit of the remark consists in part in the pun involved in ad equum rescribere, which may mean either to transfer to the cavalry or to raise to the rank of knighthood."

"fere vigilia solvit equitesque in ULTERIOREM PORTUM progredi et naves conscendere et se sequi iussit."|"ulteriorem portum: i.e. further to the east, referring to the place where the eighteen vessels assigned to the cavalry had been detained; see 1. 5."

"NOT FOUND"|"What effect did Caesar's victory have upon the Gallic chiefs? What request did they present to Caesar?"

"postridie eius diei praeter castra caesaris suas copias traduxit et milibus passuum duobus ultra eum castra fecit eo consilio UTI FRUMENTO commeatuque qui ex sequanis et haeduis supportaretur caesarem intercluderet."|"uti frumento ... intercluderet: this clause is in apposition with consilio, but it at the same time expresses the purpose of traduxit and fecit."

"NOT FOUND"|"Neque ... temere = et non ... facile."

"celeriter, ut ante caesar imperaverat, ignibus significatione facta, ex proximis castellis EO CONCURSUM est,  pugnatumque ab hostibus ita acriter est ut a viris fortibus in extrema spe salutis iniquo loco contra eos qui ex vallo turribusque tela iacerent pugnari debuit, cum in una virtute omnis spes consisteret."|"eo concursum est: our soldiers rushed to the spot; impersonal, pugnatumque ab hostibus est: render actively, the enemy fought. a virisfortibus, construe with pugnari, actively."

"tandem vulneribus defessi et pedem referre et, QUOD MONS suberit circiter mille passuum spatio, eo se recipere coeperunt."|"quod mons abprat^'etc.: because there was a mountain about a mile off."

"NOT FOUND"|"18. plus Caesarem facere : that Caesar was doing more, i.e. for that legion."

"mittuntur etiam ad eas civitates legati quae sunt citerioris hispaniae finitimae aquitaniae: INDE AUXILIA ducesque arcessuntur."|"inde . . . auxilia: on the general relation between Britain and Gaul, see ii, 4, 14, and iii, 8, 9."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. reliqui . .. reciperent, . .. habebant: the survivors (the rest) neither knew (had) whither to betake themselves, nor, etc."

"cum ex captivis quaereret caesar quam ob rem ariovistus proelio non decertaret, hanc reperiebat causam, quod apud germanos ea consuetudo esset ut MATRES FAMILIAE eorum sortibus et vaticinationibus declararent utrum proelium committi ex usu esset necne; eas ita dicere:  non esse fas germanos superare, si ante novam lunam proelio contendissent."|"matres familiae: many German matrons were supposed to be possessed of prophetic power."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 7. *** Caesari: note the emphatic position. Caesar was then before Rome, holding the military authority (imperium) of proconsul. Every consul at the expiration of his term of office was entitled to the government of a province for one year, but by a special l^w the three provinces of Cisalpine and Transalpine Gaul and Illyricum had been assigned to Caesar for a term of five years."

"quibus rebus caesar vehementer commotus MATURANDUM SIBI existimavit, ne, si nova manus sueborum cum veteribus copiis ariovisti sese coniunxisset, minus facile resisti posset."|"maturandum sibi: that he must make haste; give literal meaning; maturandum, impersonal passive."

"NOT FOUND"|"his: refers to the Helvetii."

"his cum sua sponte persuadere non possent, legatos ad dumnorigem haeduum mittunt, ut EO DEPRECATORE a sequanis impetrarent."|"eo deprecatore: by his interception, lit. he being an intercessor."

"ipse interim in colle medio triplicem aciem instruxit legionum quattuor veteranarum; IN SUMMO iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque in unum locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"in summo iugO: on the very summit.	Iugum,	in distinction frommons, a mountain or hill, often denotes the summit of a hill, or the ridge of a range of hills."

"qui cum propter siccitates paludum quo se reciperent non haberent, QUO PERFUGIO superiore anno erant usi, omnes fere in potestatem labieni venerunt."|"quo perfugio . . . usi: a refuge (i.e. the marshes) of which they had availed themselves the preceding year ; see iii, 28."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 64, line 1. *** in utram partem fluat: indirect question, subject of possit. H. 649, 11; LM. 810; A. 334; G. 467; B. 300; (H. 529, I)."

"reperti sunt COMPLURES NOSTRI qui in phalanga insilirent et scuta manibus revellerent et desuper vulnerarent."|"23. complures nostri: many of our soldiers."

"ea res est helvetiis PER INDICIUM enuntiata."|"per indicium = per indices: by informers."

"UNUM SE esse ex omni civitate haeduorum qui adduci non potuerit ut iuraret aut liberos suos obsides daret."|"30. Unum se esse ... teneretur: Direct discourse:Unus ego sum ex omni civitate Haeduorum qui adduci non potuerim ut iurarem aut liberos meos obsides darem. Ob eam rem e* civitate profugi et Romam ad senatum veni auxilium postulatum, quod solus neque iure iurando neque obsidibus tenebar."

"NOT FOUND"|"impedimentis: explain case; see note on imperio potiri, p. 57,1. 6."

"caesar, quod memoria tenebat l. cassium consulem occisum exercitumque eius ab helvetiis pulsum et sub iugum missum, CONCEDENDUM NON putabat;  neque homines inimico animo, data facultate per provinciam itineris faciundi, temperaturos ab iniuria et maleficio existimabat."|"concedendum non putabat: he did not think that he ought to gi ant jM-j their request', lit. that there should be no yielding; concedendum is impersonal. ^inimico animo: with hostile feelings; see bono animo, with note, -p. 59** 1* 27*	'	xaie:data facultate: if the opportunity should be granted.	,	,itineris faciundi: gerundive construction, depending on facultate; cf. ad effeminandos animos, p. ^5, 1. IO."

"tamen, ut spatium intercedere posset dum milites quos imperaverat convenirent, legatis respondit diem se ad deliberandum sumpturum: SI QUID vellent, ad id."|"19* Si quid ipsi: indirect discourse to the end of the chapter: Direct:Si quid mihi a Caesare opus esset, ego ad eum venissem (venturus eram); si quid ille me vult, ilium ad me venire oportet. Praeterea ego neque sine exercitu in eas partes Galliae venire audeo quas Caesar possidet, neque exercitum sine magno commeatu atque molimento in unum locum contrahere possum. Mihi autem mirum videtur quid in mea Gallia, quam bello vici, aut Caesari aut omnino populo Romano negotii sit."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAN 113supererant... essent: remained in arms."

"NOT FOUND"|"confecto : finished\ i.e. cleared."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut . . . contenderent . . . niterentur: subjunctives of result, depending on didicisse and explaining ita; see ut. . . debuerint, p. 63, 1. 14."

"eorum satisfactione accepta et ITINERE EXQUISITO per diviciacum, quod ex gallis ei maximam fidem habebat, ut milium amplius quinquaginta circuitu locis apertis exercitum duceret, de quarta vigilia, ut dixerat, profectus est."|"itinere exquisito ... ut, etc.: having ascertained the route, etc., so that he could lead' etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"In' this emergency, where does Caesar first appear? What does he do there? Where is he next seen?"

"quod ubi crassus animadvertit, suas copias propter exiguitatem non facile diduci, hostem et vagari et vias obsidere et castris satis praesidii relinquere, ob eam causam minus commode frumentum commeatumque sibi supportari, IN DIES hostium numerum augeri, non cunctandum existimavit quin pugna decertaret."|"in dies: daily. This is the proper expression here with augeri, as in dies is used of a daily increase or decrease, while cotidie is the general word for daily."

"bello SUPERATOS ESSE arvernos et rutenos a q. fabio maximo, quibus populus romanus ignovisset neque in provinciam redegisset neque stipendium posuisset."|"superatos esse: this was in the year 121 B.c., when Fabius with thirty thousand men is said to have vanquished two hundred thousand Gauls."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 12. *** diei: H. 446, 5; LM. 553; A. 223, e; B. 201, 3, a;(H. 398, 5)."

"NOT FOUND"|"doleant, velint:- note the change to the present tense expressing a general truth."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 51. *** praesidio, castris: with what verb are these datives to be construed? What is the direct object of that verb?"

"quibus rebus caesar VEHEMENTER COMMOTUS maturandum sibi existimavit, ne, si nova manus sueborum cum veteribus copiis ariovisti sese coniunxisset, minus facile resisti posset."|"18. vehementer commotus: a remarkable confession from Caesar."

"bello helvetiorum confecto totius fere galliae legati, principes civitatum, ad caesarem gratulatum convenerunt:  intellegere sese, tametsi PRO VETERIBUS helvetiorum iniuriis populi romani ab his poenas bello repetisset, tamen eam rem non minus ex usu [terrae] galliae quam populi romani accidisse,  propterea quod eo consilio florentissimis rebus domos suas helvetii reliquissent uti toti galliae bellum inferrent imperioque potirentur, locumque domicilio ex magna copia deligerent quem ex omni gallia oportunissimum ac fructuosissimum iudicassent, reliquasque civitates stipendiarias haberent."|"pro veteribus Helvetiorum iniuriis populi Romani: for the wrongs of long standing done by the Helvetii to the Roman people\ Helvetiorum is a subjective genitive, and populi an objective genitive."

"NOT FOUND"|"vicisset: represents the perfect indicative of the direct discourse, because Ariovistus in his pride would be sure to emphasize the fact of his victory; explain mood; see fecissent***, p. 81, 1. 8."

"NOT FOUND"|"Belgae ... oriuntur: here Belgae, the name of the people, suggests the country; see eorum una pars, p. 55,1. 17."

"NOT FOUND"|"satis causae: sufficient reason."

"NOT FOUND"|"immani . . . efficit: makes them men of immense stature; homines, predicate accusative; the object is omitted; immani magnitudine, ablative of characteristic."

"reperiebat etiam in quaerendo caesar, quod proelium equestre adversum PAUCIS ANTE diebus esset factum, initium eius fugae factum a dumnorige atque eius equitibus (nam equitatui, quem auxilio caesari haedui miserant, dumnorix praeerat): eorum fuga reliquum esse equitatum perterritum."|"4. paucis ante diebus: ante is an adverb, and diebus, ablative, measure of difference, a few days before. H. 488; LM. 655; A. 259, d; G. 403; B. 357. 15 (H. 430)."

"qua de causa helvetii quoque reliquos gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipSI IN eorum finibus bellum gerunt."|"si in . . . deducerentur: if they should be reduced to that state."

"eodem die ab exploratoribus certior factus hostes sub monte consedisse milia passuum ab ipsius castris octo, qualis esset natura montis et QUALIS IN circuitu ascensus qui cognoscerent misit."|"28. qualis in circuitu ascensus: what was the character of the ascent on all sides ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"suam: his, referring to Diviciacus."

"NOT FOUND"|"568, 7; LM. 908; A. 317, b\ G. 545, 2; B. 282, a; (H. 497, II, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"excedendi: gerund, depending on facultas."

"NOT FOUND"|"quorum, his: quorum refers to his for its antecedent, and his depends upon imperavit."

"is ita cum caesare egit: si pacem populus romanus cum helvetiis faceret, in eam partem ituros ATQUE IBI futuros helvetios ubi eos caesar constituisset atque esse voluisset;  sin bello persequi perseveraret, reminisceretur et veteris incommodi populi romani et pristinae virtutis helvetiorum."|"atque ibi: and there, i.e. on the northern side of the river, near Berry- au-Bac."

"NOT FOUND"|"Original from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWANOTES ***BOOK 1, 11, 12quod: antecedent ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"quae... sint dicta: indirect question; see in utram partem fluat, p. 64,1. 1. ipso: i.e. Diviciaco; see chapter 17."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo: into which."

"NOT FOUND"|"Pedestria itinera : approaches by land,aestuariis: some of these estuaries extend inland for miles."

"NOT FOUND"|"complures : construe with civitates."

"NOT FOUND"|"id ... futurum... esse nomen: observe that these infinitives depend on orabant in the sense of saying."

"NOT FOUND"|"What mistake did Considius make and what was the result of it?"

"NOT FOUND"|"castris: ablative of means."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by GOOglCCAESAR***S GALLIC WARimperio, etc.: under the rule of the Roman people; ablative of time and cause."

"legionis confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit, quartae cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, signo amisso, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis aut occisis, in his primipilo p. sextio baculo, fortissimo viro, multis gravibusque vulneribus confecto, ut iam se sustinere non posset, reliquos esse tardiores et non nullos ab novissimis deserto loco proelio excedere ac tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes intermittere et ab utroque latere instare et rem esse in angusto vidit, NEQUE ULLUM esse subsidium quod submitti posset,  scuto ab novissimis [uni] militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus milites signa inferre et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis uti possent."|"neque ullum subsidium : the rear guard was not yet in sight."

"NOT FOUND"|"quo ... doleant: subjunctive of purpose. Why is quo used?"

"NOT FOUND"|"seque ... recipiat: que connects mittunt and petunt; se, object of recipiat, and se ... recipiat, the object of petunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum oporteret: whenever it was necessary."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 31.***Eo concilio dimisso: this is the only intimation which Caesar has given us that the council was held."

"NOT FOUND"|"quorum: construe wdth amicitiae; the antecedent is iis."

"NOT FOUND"|"ad Ariovistum: where was Ariovistus? See note on in eas partes, p. 81,1. 21."

"NOT FOUND"|"continentur: not like continetur (p. 55, 1. 18), but are confintd\ hemmed in by the Rhine, the Rhone, Mount Jura, and Lake Lemannus."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 103, line 1. *** fines Bellovacorum: remember that the Bellovaci dwelt in the western part of Gallia Belgica."

"namque omnium rerum quae ad bellum usui erant summa erat in eo oppido facultas,   idque NATURA LOCI sic muniebatur ut magnam ad ducendum bellum daret facultatem, propterea quod flumen [alduas] dubis ut circino circumductum paene totum oppidum cingit,  reliquum spatium, quod est non amplius pedum mdc, qua flumen intermittit, mons continet magna altitudine, ita ut radices eius montis ex utraque parte ripae fluminis contingant,  hunc murus circumdatus arcem efficit et cum oppido coniungit."|"natura loci confidebant: they relied upon the character of their country. H. 476, 3; LM. 629; A. 254, b; G. 401, N. 6; B. 218, 3; (H. 425,1, n.)."

"LEGATUM EX suis sese magno cum periculo ad eum missurum et hominibus feris obiecturum existimabat."|"Legatum ex suis... existimabat: he thought that to send to him (Ariovistus) one of his officers as an envoy, and thus to expose him to savage men, would be attended with great danger, lit. that he would send, etc., . . . with great peril, and would expose him to savage men."

"cum his haeduos eorumque clientes semel atque iterum armis contendisse; magnam calamitatem pulsos accepisse, OMNEM NOBILITATEM, omnem senatum, omnem equitatum amisisse."|"omnem nobilitatem ... equitatum amisisse: we must not take this too literally. Diviciacus and Dumnorix both belonged to one or more of the classes here represented as annihilated."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. mulieres: object of coniecisse."

"sic omnibus hostium copiis fusis ARMISQUE EXUTIS se intra munitiones suas recipiunt."|"6. armisque exutis: and disarmed\ i.e. in their flight the Gauls had thrown away their arms; exutis agrees with copiis, and afmis, ablative of separation, depends upon it; see defensoribus nudatus est, p. 103,1. 24."

"NOT FOUND"|"rogatum: to ask. H. 633; LM. 1005; A. 302; G. 435; B. 340, 1; (H. 546)."

"quam quisque ab opere in partem casu devenit quaeque prima signa conspexit, ad haec constitit, ne IN QUAERENDIS suis pugnandi tempus dimitteret."|"in quaerendis suis: in seeking his ownt i.e. his own standards."

"ubi de eius adventu helvetii certiores facti sunt, legatos ad eum mittunt nobilissimos civitatis, cuius legationis nammeius et verucloetius principem locum obtinebant, qui dicerent sibi esse in animo SINE ULLO maleficio iter per provinciam facere, propterea quod aliud iter haberent nullum: rogare ut eius voluntate id sibi facere liceat."|"sine ullo maleficio: without doing any damage, lit. without any wrongdoing."

"NOT FOUND"|"neque . . . dicendum sibi . . . putaret: and thought that he did not need to speak about matters of common interest; neque, and. . . not; sibi, the apparent agent of the impersonal passive, should be rendered by the nominative, and the impersonal passive dicendum by the active, as above; sibi refers to Ariovistus."

"NOT FOUND"|"primipilo: the chief centurion; ablative with confecto. The primipilus, as the chief centurion of the legion, was intrusted with the eagle or standard of the legion; see 81."

"NOT FOUND"|"absunt, est: the mood shows that these clauses are not a part of the report, but Caesar***s own statements."

"NOT FOUND"|"pueri, senes, mulieresque: subject of exissent, to be supplied from exisset above. On the use of que in mulieresque, observe that between three or more coordinate words the conjunction is, in general, either repeated or omitted altogether; but that que may be used with the last member of a series even when the conjunction is omitted between the other words, as in this instance."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 148, line 3. *** trans flumen: on the other side of the river, i.e. on the east or German side."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 17. *** quod ... tacuerat: what (that which) he had hitherto kept secret; quod is often thus used for id quod\ like the English what, for that which."

"NOT FOUND"|"pagos . . . consedisse: that near the banks of the Rhine a hundredOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARcantons of the Suebi had encamped\ who, etc. These words, if taken literally, would include the whole body of the Suebi; but they seem to be used here only of the army, which consisted of one hundred thousand men, one thousand from each canton; see iv, 1."

"NOT FOUND"|"equitum: Caesar***s brief description does not enable us to decide positively whether equitum refers to the Britons or to their enemy, but as Caesar is here giving a description of the usual tactics of the essedarii in battle, it seems natural to make it refer to the enemy."

"NOT FOUND"|"equitibus: dative with detractis. H. 429; LM. 534; A. 229; G. 347, r. 5; B. 187,11; (H. 386)."

"NOT FOUND"|"plurimum: supply posset, expressed with minimum below. #domi: loqatfve. H.484, 2; LM. 621; A. 258, d; G. 411, R. 2; B. 232, 2; (H. 426, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"30. Haec ... . contexebantur: these were connected by timbers placed in the direction of the length of the bridge. This was a trestle bridge. Caesar, having now described one trestle, supporting one section of the bridge, leaves us to infer that all the trestles were constructed in the same way. He nowOriginal from***UNIVERSITY OF IOWACAESAR***S GALLIC WARproceeds to show how these trestles were connected, and how the bridge was covered."

"NOT FOUND"|"attribuant: this represents the imperative of the direct discourse."

"qua in re caesar non solum publicas, sed etiam privatas iniurias ultus est, quod EIUS SOCERI l. pisonis avum, l. pisonem legatum, tigurini eodem proelio quo cassium interfecerant."|"20. eius soceri L. Pisonis: of Lucius Piso, his (Caesar***s) father-in-law. This is Lucius Piso, the consul mentioned on p. 60, 1. 3. Caesar had married his daughter Calpurnia.CAESAR***S GALLIC WARL. Pisonem . . . interfecerant: the Tigurini, in the same battle in which they had slain Cassius, had slain his lieutenant, L. Piso. Observe that the English repeats the verb had slain, while in Latin interfecerant is expressed only once."

"ariovistus EX EQUIS ut conloquerentur et praeter se denos ad conloquium adducerent postulavit."|"ex equis: on horseback ; see ex vinculis, p. 58,1. 20."

"NOT FOUND"|"hanc ... causam: explained by quod ... consuetudo esset, a causal clause in apposition with it. For the subjunctive esset, see quod.. . sublevetur, p. 67,1. 15."

"de tertia vigilia t. labienum, LEGATUM PRO praetore, cum duabus legionibus et iis ducibus qui iter cognoverant summum iugum montis ascendere iubet; quid sui consilii sit ostendit."|"legatum pro praetore \ his lieutenant with praetorian power. Praetor is here used in the sense of commander in chief. Caesar is the praetor. Lega-Original fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWAtus pro praetore is an honorary title, applicable to the general or lieutenant who acts as commander in chief (pro praetore') in the absence of that officer*cum iis ducibus: with those persons as guides; ducibus in predicate apposition with iis."

"itaque vocatis ad se undique mercatoribus, neque quanta esset insulae magnitudo neque quae aut quantae nationes incolerent, neque quem usum belli haberent aut quibus institutis uterentur, neque QUI ESSENT ad maiorem navium multitudinem idonei portus reperire poterat."|"qui essent idonei portus: what suitable harbors there were, not what harbors were suitable."

"NOT FOUND"|"Why did Ariovistus engage in skirmishing and yet decline a general engagement?"

"maiori tamen parti placuit, hoc reservato AD EXTREMUM casum consilio interim rei eventum experiri et castra defendere."|"ad extremum: as a last resort."

"id aliquot de causis acciderat, ut subito galli belli renovandi legionisque opprimendae consilium caperent:  primum, quod legionem NEQUE EAM plenissimam detractis cohortibus duabus et compluribus singillatim, qui commeatus petendi causa missi erant, absentibus propter paucitatem despiciebant;  tum etiam, quod propter iniquitatem loci, cum ipsi ex montibus in vallem decurrerent et tela coicerent, ne primum quidem impetum suum posse sustineri existimabant."|"neque eam plenissimam: and that indeed not very full. This legion had suffered severely in the battle of the Sambre, so that it was not full even before the two cohorts were detached for service among the Nantuates."

"nam hoc toto proelio, cum ab hora septima ad vesperum pugnatum sit, AVERSUM HOSTEM videre nemo potuit."|"aversum hostem: a retreating foe."

"futurum esse paucis annis uti omnes ex galliae finibus pellerentur atque omnes germani rhenum transirent; NEQUE ENIM conferendum esse gallicum cum germanorum agro neque hanc consuetudinem victus cum illa comparandam."|"neque enim . . . neque: for neither .. . nor."

"NOT FOUND"|"commeatus: subject of possent."

"quo proelio sublati helvetii, quod quingentis equitibus TANTAM MULTITUDINEM equitum propulerant, audacius subsistere non numquam et novissimo agmine proelio nostros lacessere coeperunt."|"tantam multitudinem quantum fuit diei spatium : as large a number as the length of the day permitted, lit. as was the space of the day."

"NOT FOUND"|"What historical facts have you learned in this chapter ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"superarint: give the full form. Note and explain the tense."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam magnis itineribus contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, CUM HIS quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"cum his Adiatunnus: this is a repetition of Adiatunnus ... cum DC devotis, justified by the long intervening parenthesis."

"NOT FOUND"|"eius: referring to Caesar."

"hunc ad egrediendum nequaquam idoneum locum arbitratus, dum RELIQUAE NAVES eo convenirent ad horam nonam in ancoris expectavit."|"reliquae naves: the other ships, i.e. other than primis navibus, with which Caesar arrived; see 1. 17 above."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut occuparet: to seize; object clause of purpose; see note on ut... exirent, p. 57, 1. 4. The imperfect is explained by its connection with the historical present persuadet. The royal power (regnum) seems not to have been hereditary, but to have been conferred by the people or seized by ambitious chiefs; obtinuerat and occuparet illustrate the change of meaning which often takes place in the history of words. Obtineo, our word obtain, does not mean obtain, but hold\ occupy, while occupo, our word occupy, does not mean occupy, but seize."

"NOT FOUND"|"quaeque : and those things which, or and whatever."

"ita ancipiti proelio diu atque acriter PUGNATUM EST."|"pugnatum est: they fought, lit. it was fought, the battle went on. The impersonal subject is contained in the verb itself.	~~25. alteri, alteri: one party (the Helvetii), the other (the Boii and Tulingi)."

"perfacile factu esSE ILLIS probat conata perficere, propterea quod ipse suae civitatis imperium obtenturus esset:  non esse dubium quin totius galliae plurimum helvetii possent; se suis copiis suoque exercitu illis regna conciliaturum confirmat."|"se illis .. . conciliaturum: that he would procure for them the sovereign power, i.e. in their respective states; hence the plural regna; conciliaturum, future infinitive without esse."

"NOT FOUND"|"lingua, institutis, legibus: ablatives of specification. Note carefully the distinction between this use of lingua and that just noticed in ipsorum lingua,N3NOTES *** BOOK I, I, 2ipsi: they themselves, i.e. the Helvetii."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 110, line 1. *** si fecerit, amplificaturum: which form of the conditional sentence does this represent? What mood, tense, number, and person would be used in the direct discourse?"

"milites non longiore oratione cohortatus quam uti suae pristinae virtutis memoriam retinerent neu perturbarentur animo hostiumque impetum fortiter sustinerent,  quod non longius hostes aberant QUAM QUO telum adigi posset, proelii committendi signum dedit."|"quam quo . .. desiderent: than because they wish, etc. H. 588, 2; LM. 839; A. 320, d; G. 541, N. 2; (H. 516, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"arbitrari: that they (i.e. the Remi) thought'."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. unos: observe the plural, meaning alone."

"prima luce, cum SUMMUS MONS a [lucio] labieno teneretur, ipse ab hostium castris non longius mille et quingentis passibus abesset neque, ut postea ex captivis comperit, aut ipsius adventus aut labieni cognitus esset,   considius equo admisso ad eum accurrit, dicit montem, quem a labieno occupari voluerit, ab hostibus teneri: id se a gallicis armis atque insignibus cognovisse."|"summus mons: the summit of the mountain. H. 497,4; LM. 565; A. 193; G. 291, R. 2; B. 241, I; (H. 440, 2, N. 1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"3. sese . . . coepissent: should begin to retreat; coepissent represents the future perfect of the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"tantummodo tela missa exciperent: only receive the missiles sent, i.e. receive them on their shields, protect themselves against the missiles of the enemy, but hurl none themselves."

"eodem tempore equites nostri levisque armaturae pedites, qui cum iis una fuerant, quos primo hostium impetu pulsos dixeram, cum se in castra reciperent, adversis hostibus occurrebant ac rursus aliam in partem fugam petebant;  et calones, qui AB DECUMANA porta ac summo iugo collis nostros victores flumen transire conspexerant, praedandi causa egressi, cum respexissent et hostes in nostris castris versari vidissent, praecipites fugae sese mandabant."|"ab decumana porta: at (from) the decuman gate. Note this idiomatic use of ab; cf. ex utraque partey p. 104,1. 25."

"deinde reliquae legiones CUM TRIBUNIS militum et primorum ordinum centurionibus egerunt uti caesari satis facerent: se neque umquam dubitasse neque timuisse neque de summa belli suum iudicium sed imperatoris esse existimavisse."|"cum tribunis . . . egerunt: arranged with the tribunes, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"24. obsides: predicate accusative with dare."

"NOT FOUND"|"Factum . . . periculum: that this enemy had been tested\ lit. a trial of this enemy had been made. Factum for factum esse."

"quae ubi convenit ac primum ab hostibus visa est, circiter ccxx naves eorum paratissimae atque omni genere armorum ornatissimae profectae ex portu nostris adversae constiterunt;  neque satis bruto, qui classi praeerat, vel tribunis militum centurionibusque, quibus singulae naves erant attributae, constabat QUID AGERENT aut quam rationem pugnae insisterent."|"quid agerent: what they were to do, a doubting question. The subjunctive would be used even in the direct discourse."

"armorum magna multitudine de muro in fossam, quae erat ante oppidum, iacta, sic ut prope summam muri aggerisque altitudinem acervi armorum adaequarent, et tamen circiter parte tertia, ut postea perspectum est, celata atque in oppido retenta, portis patefactis eo die PACE SUNT usi."|"* 26. pace sunt usi: they accepted the offer of peace."

"et x. milites, ut in sinistra parte aciei constiterant, pilis emissis cursu ac lassitudine exanimatos vulneribusque confectos atrebates (nam his ea pars obvenerat) celeriter EX LOCO superiore in flumen compulerunt et transire conantes insecuti gladiis magnam partem eorum impeditam interfecerunt."|"ex loco superiore: i.e. from the fortifications of the camp."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 24.***duplici acie: in a double line of battle, i.e. with two lines of cohorts, instead of three, the usual number; see note on triplicem aciem, p. 72, 1. 18. By this arrangement, Crassus presented a more extended front."

"ob easque res EX LITTERIS caesaris dierum xv supplicatio decreta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nulli."|"ex litteris . . . supplicatio: see note on p. 124,1. 11. This remarkable thanksgiving of twenty days shows what a deep impression Caesar had made on the Roman mind by his bold expeditions into the hitherto unknown realms of Germany and Britain."

"NOT FOUND"|"Cum: and since,ab aperto letere: on the exposed side, i.e. the right, as the shield protected the left side."

"deinde reliquae legiones cum tribunis militum et PRIMORUM ORDINUM centurionibus egerunt uti caesari satis facerent: se neque umquam dubitasse neque timuisse neque de summa belli suum iudicium sed imperatoris esse existimavisse."|"primorum ordinum centurionibus: with the centurions of the first rank. The six centurions of the first cohort are probably meant; see 83."

"NOT FOUND"|"How did Caesar regard Dumnorix? Why did he not proceed to try and punish him?"

"ipse interim in colle medio triplicem aciem instruxit legionum quattuor veteranarum; in summo iugo duas legiones quas in gallia citeriore proxime conscripserat et omnia auxilia conlocavit,  ita ut supra se totum montem hominibus compleret; impedimenta sarcinasque IN UNUM locum conferri et eum ab iis qui in superiore acie constiterant muniri iussit."|"in unum Oppidum: the situation of this town is not known. Napoleon III identifies it with the citadel of Namur at the junction of the Sambre and the Meuse; see the plan in the text; but von Gdler places it lower down the Meuse, opposite the town of Huy."

"NOT FOUND"|"neve . .. neve; neither ... nor, the regular connectives between negative purpose clauses."

"NOT FOUND"|"uti... desereret: an object clause depending on pati, which usually takes the infinitive with subject accusative."

"NOT FOUND"|"How many legions did Caesar place in wrinter quarters? About how many men did those legions probably contain? In what part of Gaul were the winter quarters?"

"NOT FOUND"|"uti . . . cogant: a substantive clause, in apposition with hoc; see id... ut.. . caperent, p. 126, L 23."

"id ex itinere oppugnare conatus, quod VACUUM AB defensoribus esse audiebat, propter latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem paucis defendentibus expugnare non potuit."|"vacuum ab defensoribus: vacuum agrees with id from the preceding clause."

"NOT FOUND"|"proponebatur: was clearly seen, lit. was set before him."

"NOT FOUND"|"*** 19. dispersos: them (our men) separated,20. incertis ordinibus: as their ranks were already in disorder***Chapter 33. *** hoc est: is as follows."

"namque omnium rerum quae ad bellum usui erant summa erat in eo oppido facultas,   idque natura loci sic muniebatur ut magnam ad ducendum bellum daret facultatem, propterea quod flumen [alduas] dubis ut circino circumductum paene totum oppidum cingit,  reliquum spatium, quod est non amplius pedum mdc, qua flumen intermittit, mons continet magna altitudine, ita ut radices eius montis EX UTRAQUE parte ripae fluminis contingant,  hunc murus circumdatus arcem efficit et cum oppido coniungit."|"25. ex utraque .. . habebat: had a steep descent on each side."

"eo concilio dimisso, idem princeps civitatum qui ante fuerant ad caesarem reverterunt petieruntque uti sibi secreto IN OCCULTO de sua omniumque salute cum eo agere liceret."|"in occulto: observe the emphatic position between ne and quidem. A word or a phrase may be thus emphasized."

"NOT FOUND"|"'9. cum . . . laturos: indirect discourse; give the direct."

"ibi orgetorigis filia atque UNUS E filiis captus est."|"unus e filiis: the regular construction with unus. H. 444, 1; LM. 563; A. 216, c; G. 372, R. 2; B. 201, 1, a; (H. 397, N. 3)."

"NOT FOUND"|"turribus excitatis: even if towers were erected."

"NOT FOUND"|"occupare : the subject is the implied antecedent of quL6. in Ubiorum finibus : see chapter 3."

"haec omnia caesar eodem illo pertinere arbitrabatur ut tridui mora interposita equites eorum qui abessent reverterentur; tamen sese non longius milibus passuum iiii AQUATIONIS CAUSA processurum eo die dixit:  huc postero die quam frequentissimi convenirent, ut de eorum postulatis cognosceret."|"17. aquationis causa: for the purpose of procuring water, probably from a small stream now called Niers."

"rhenus autem oritur ex lepontiis, qui alpes incolunt, et longo spatio per fines nantuatium, helvetiorum, sequanorum, mediomatricorum, tribocorum, treverorum citatus fertur et,  ubi oceano adpropinquavit, in plures diffluit partes multis ingentibus insulis effectis, quarum pars magna a feris barbaris nationibus incolitur,  ex quibus sunt qui piscibus atque ovis avium vivere existimantur, MULTIS CAPITIBUS in oceanum influit.]"|"3. multis capitibus: with many mouths ; but caput, when used of a river, generally means source."

"ad eas res conficiendas biennium SIBI SATIS esse duxerunt; in tertium annum profectionem lege confirmant."|"sibi satis: sufficient for them ; sibi depends upon satis, which is a predicate adjective agreeing with biennium. H, 434; LM. 536; A. 234; G. 359; B. 192, 1; (H. 391, I)."

"NOT FOUND"|"4. ut . . . impetrarent: that they might obtain their request; see ut. *** *** suppeteret, p. 57, 1. 24. The verb impetro is often thus used without an object."

"eorum qui domum redierunt CENSU HABITO, ut caesar imperaverat, repertus est numerus milium c et x."|"censu habito: when an actual enumeration had been made> lit. had. Census is here used in this general sense. The same term, when applied to the Romans, often meant much more than this, including not only the numbering of the citizens, but also the valuation of property and a general review of the condition of the state. At Rome such a census was taken every five years."

"NOT FOUND"|"Octodurus: now Martigny."

"postquam id animum advertit, copias suas caesar in proximum collem subduxit equitatumque, QUI SUSTINERET hostium impetum, misit."|"qui sustineret: to sustain. Observe that the qui clause of purpose calls attention to the agent of 'the action, equitatum qui, while the ut clause of purpose emphasizes the purpose itself; see qui dicerent, p. 60,1. 15."

"NOT FOUND"|"quanta . . . daretur: object of demonstraverunt; explain mood."

"NOT FOUND"|"Gallorum equitatui: remember that Caesar***s cavalry consisted entirely of foreigners, chiefly of Gauls, but with a few Germans and Spaniards."

"duces vero ii deliguntur qui una cum q. sertorio OMNES ANNOS fuerant summamque scientiam rei militaris habere existimabantur."|"omnes annos: during all the years, i.e. during the eight years of the war waged by Sertorius in Spain against Rome, from 80 to 72 b.c."

"multo denique die per exploratores caesar cognovit et montem a suis teneri et helvetios castra movisse et considium timore perterriTUM QUOD non vidisset pro viso sibi renuntiavisse."|"tum quod *** ***. existimabant: a second reason."

"NOT FOUND"|"quod ... enuntiarit: who gives this reason* Caesar or Liscus?"

"dum ea conquiruntur et conferuntur, [NOCTE INTERMISSA] circiter hominum milia vi eius pagi qui verbigenus appellatur, sive timore perterriti, ne armis traditis supplicio adficerentur, sive spe salutis inducti, quod in tanta multitudine dediticiorum suam fugam aut occultari aut omnino ignorari posse existimarent, prima nocte e castris helvetiorum egressi ad rhenum finesque germanorum contenderunt."|"nocte intermissa: as night intervened, i.e. set in, Dum . *** *** conquiruntur."

"ob eas causas ei munitioni quam fecerat t. labienum legatum praeficit; ipse in italiam magnis itineribus contendit duasque ibi legiones conscribit et tres, quae circum aquileiam hiemabant, ex hibernis educit et, qua proximum iter in ulteriorem galliam per alpes erat, CUM HIS quinque legionibus ire contendit."|"Cum his *** *** *** erat: the encounter of our fleet with these, etc.CAESAR'S GALLIC WAR	fPages 134, 135classi: dative of possessor."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 12. *** in extremis lingulis: at the very end of tongues of land,pedibus: by land,cum . . . incitavisset: at high tide these peninsulas became islands."

"ibi perpauci aut viribus confisi tranare contenderunt aut LINTRIBUS INVENTIS sibi salutem reppererunt."|"5. lintribus inventis: by means of boats which chanced to be at hand,inventis, reppererunt: invenio means to find 'nthout seeking, to meet with accidentally, while referio means to find by seeking,, to obtain by effort This sentence is a good illustration of the use of these two synonyms.	."

"hac confirmata OPINIONE TIMORIS idoneum quendam hominem et callidum deligit, gallum, ex iis quos auxilii causa secum habebat."|"opinione timoris: by the impression (they had given us) of their cowardice."

"NOT FOUND"|"eam consuetudinem: explained by ut. . . haberent quicquam .. . et lavarentur in fluminibus, i.e. the custom of wearing little clothing and of bathing in rivers."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 15. *** Germani: the German soldiers."

"NOT FOUND"|"conarentur, posset: imperfect after the historical present communit."

"compluribus his proeliis pulsis ab ocelo, quod est oppidum citerioris provinciae extremum, in fines vocontiorum ulterioris provinciae DIE SEPTIMO pervenit; inde in allobrogum fines, ab allobrogibus in segusiavos exercitum ducit."|"die septimo: see die constituta, p. 58,1. 23."

"palus erat NON MAGNA inter nostrum atque hostium exercitum."|"non magna adiecta planitie: with a small adjoining plain."

"NOT FOUND"|"13. Chapter 52. *** singulos legatos et quaestorem: Caesar appointed his quaestor over one legion, and a lieutenant over each of the others; see 78, 79."

"NOT FOUND"|"eosdem . . . capere: to reach the same port as the rest."

"NOT FOUND"|"26. Chapter 31.***vero moveri: that it (the tower) was actually moving."

"NOT FOUND"|"Chapter 8. *** propter eximiam opinionem virtutis: on account of their remarkable reputation for valor, lit. opinion of valor."

"NOT FOUND"|"defesso: indirect object of dabatur."

"si quos ADVERSUM PROELIUM et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"adversum proelium: see p. 78,11. 18-21."

"NOT FOUND"|"finitimae: this agrees with quae, and governs Aquitaniae."

"his nuntiis litterisque commotus caesar duas legiones in citeriore gallia novas conscripsit et inita aestate in ulteriorem galliam QUI DEDUCERET q. pedium legatum misit."|"qui deduceret: to lead them. Note the omission of the object, a relative clause of purpose. H. 590; LM. 835; A. 317, 2; G. 630; B. 282, 2; (H. 497** I)*Q. Pedium: the son of Caesar***s sister, Julia. Pedium, antecedent of qui. Page 100, line 1. ***cum ... inciperet: see note on cum esset, p. 99,1. 1."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 138, line 1. *** pro perfuga : in the assumed character of a deserter."

"qua de causa helvetii quoque reliquos gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi IN EOrum finibus bellum gerunt."|"in eo peccandi. . . non esset: in his case the Germans had no motive for doing wrong, i.e. for harming him."

"QUOD SIBI caesar denuntiaret se haeduorum iniurias non neglecturum, neminem secum sine sua pernicie contendisse."|"Quod sibi . . . possent: write these sentences in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"Compare this sentence with the corresponding sentence in Caesar. Note and explain all the changes which have taken place in the sentence in passing from the direct discourse to the indirect."

"NOT FOUND"|"maiores : subject of miserunt, dediderunt, and dixerunt."

"NOT FOUND"|"quibus ... pararentur: clause of purpose."

"quod si quid ei a caesare gravius accidisset, cum ipse EUM LOCUM amicitiae apud eum teneret, neminem existimaturum non sua voluntate factum; qua ex re futurum uti totius galliae animi a se averterentur."|"eum locum . . . apud eum: such a place in his (Caesar***s) friendship."

"si quos adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset NEQUE SUI potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"neque sui potestatem fecisset: and had not given them an opportunity for fighting him, lit. an opportunity against (of) himself."

"eo mulieres imposuerunt, quae AD PROELIUM proficiscentes milites passis manibus flentes implorabant ne se in servitutem romanis traderent."|"ad proelium proficiscentes: them (the soldiers) as they went forth."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 95, line 2. *** circiter hominum ... expedita: about sixteen thousand light-armed infantry ; expedita agrees grammatically with milia, but in sense it belongs to hominum."

"NOT FOUND"|"10. neque . . . confidebant: and they trusted that our armies would not be able to remain very long among them, etc.; neque: and not,ut omnia : though everything,posse: construe with perspiciebant, below."

"ipse in carnutes, andes, turonos QUAEQUE CIVITATES propinquae iis locis erant ubi bellum gesserat, legionibus in hiberna deductis, in italiam profectus est."|"8. quaeque civitates propinquae erant: and in those states which were near. Observe that Caesar***s winter quarters, established along the line of the Loire were well placed to prevent concerted action between the Gauls on opposite sides of the river."

"NOT FOUND"|"In the meantime, the army supplies were nearly exhausted; Caesar, therefore, reluctantly turned the head of his column toward Bibracte, the chief city of the Haedui, where he would be sure to find an abundance of provisions. The Helvetii at once retraced their steps, and began to harass the rear guard of the Roman line. Thereupon Caesar withdrew his forces to a neighboring hill, and sent his cavalry to engage the enemy, while he placed his legions in battle array. It will be remembered that the Roman mode of attack required an elevated position from which the heavy javelins could be hurled into the ranks of the enemy with the greatest effect; see 106."

"cum iam amplius horis sex continenter pugnaretur, ac non solum vires sed etiam tela nostros deficerent, atque hostes acrius instarent LANGUIDIORIBUSQUE NOSTRIS vallum scindere et fossas complere coepissent, resque esset iam ad extremum perducta casum,  p. sextius baculus, primi pili centurio, quem nervico proelio compluribus confectum vulneribus diximus, et item c. volusenus, tribunus militum, vir et consilii magni et virtutis, ad galbam accurrunt atque unam esse spem salutis docent, si eruptione facta extremum auxilium experirentur."|"languidioribus nostris: as our soldiers were becoming exhausted,* ablative absolute.N IOIad extremum casum: to the last extremity."

"NOT FOUND"|"Ita ... institutos esse: that the Helvetii had been so trained\ etc. Note that instituo, to train, educate, is a more comprehensive term than doceo, to teach, or praecipio, to instruct, give precepts."

"NOT FOUND"|"has .. . occupationes: engagements in these trifling affairs."

"NOT FOUND"|"constituit: he announced his purpose,14. Chapter 7. *** quibus in locis : note the repetition of the antecedent."

"NOT FOUND"|"neque: but not,uti... constitueret... mitteret: object clause of purpose depending on velle. Volo admits, as its object, an infinitive with or without a subject, or, with changed subject, the subjunctive with or without ut,eo: on this account, explained by the clause, quod ... coicerent, practically in apposition with it."

"hoc proelio facto, reliquas copias helvetiorum ut consequi posset, pontem in arari faciendum curAT ATque ita exercitum traducit."|"21. at: at least."

"NOT FOUND"|"subducit: withdraws, fearing an attack, as Labienus is supposed to have been defeated."

"NOT FOUND"|"Messala .. . consulibus: see note on the same, p. 57,1. 2."

"ubi se diutius duci intellexit et diem instare quo die frumentum militibus metiri oporteret, convocatis eorum principibus, quorum magnam copiam in castris habebat, in his diviciaco et lisco, qui summo magistratui praeerat, quem  appellant haedui, qui creatur annuus et vitae necisque in suos habet potestatem, graviter eos accusat,  quod, cum neque emi neque ex agris sumi possit, tam necessario tempore, tam PROPINQUIS HOSTIBUS ab iis non sublevetur, praesertim cum magna ex parte eorum precibus adductus bellum susceperit[; multo etiam gravius quod sit destitutus queritur]."|"propinquis hostibus: ablative absolute."

"NOT FOUND"|"What do you think of this speech of Ariovistus ?"

"dum paucos dies ad vesontionem rei frumentariae commeatusque causa moratur, ex percontatione nostrorum vocibusque gallorum ac mercatorum, qui ingenti magnitudine corporum germanos, incredibili virtute atque exercitatione in armis esse praedicabant (saepe numero sese cum his congressos ne vultum quidem atque aciem oculorum dicebant ferre potuisse), tantus subito timor omnem exercitum occupavit UT NON mediocriter omnium mentes animosque perturbaret."|"8. ut . *** . non deesset: this is an affirmative purpose clause introduced by ut; the negative non belongs entirely to deesset, not to the clause as a whole; translate, that, if etc., . . . he might have the opportunity, lit. that the opportunity might not be wanting to him."

"NOT FOUND"|"in Aulercis: construe with in hibernis conlocavit."

"ipse idoneam tempestatem nactus paulo post mediam noctem naves solvit,  quae omnes incolumes ad continentem pervenerunt; sed ex iis onerariae duae eosdem portus quos reliquae capere non potuerunt ET PAULO infra delatae sunt."|"et paulo . . . delatae sunt: but were carried a little farther south (down). After a negative et may often be thus rendered but."

"NOT FOUND"|"primum ... sollicitarentur: indirect discourse. Direct thus:Primum, quod verentur ne omni pacata Gallia ad se exercitus noster adducatur; deinde quod ab non nullis Gallis sollicitantur."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui faceret: since he was making, causal clause with the subjunctive also in the direct discourse. H. 592; LM. 839; A. 320, e; G. 633; B. 283, 3. (H. 517)."

"NOT FOUND"|"What facts have you learned from this chapter in regard to the Sequani ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"navigationem .. . inscientiam: that access by sea was difficult (impeded) on account of our ignorance."

"NOT FOUND"|"Hi: these, i.e. the Haedui and their party on the one hand and the Averni with theirs on the other."

"NOT FOUND"|"Name the general divisions of Gaul. What two reasons are given for the valor of the Belgae?	%. Page 57, line 1, Chapter 2. *** Apud Helvetios . .. nobilissimus: what other construction could have been used? see horum omnium fortissimi, p. 55, 1. 7. H. 444; LM. 563; G. 372, r. 2; (H. 397, 3, n. 3)."

"omnibus rebus ad profectionem comparatis diem dicunt, QUA DIE ad ripam rhodani omnes conveniant."|"qua die. Is dies: explain change of gender. H. 135; LM. 231; A. 73;64; B. 53; (H. 123)."

"NOT FOUND"|"polliceantur, intulerint, satisfaciant: explain mood; see id si fieret, p. 62, 1. 19.facturos: that they (the Helvetii) would do."

"NOT FOUND"|"What have the Helvetii been doing ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 130, line 1, Chapter 8. ***Huius civitatis: of this state, i.e. of the state of the Veneti; see Map."

"interea ea legione quam secum habebat militibusque, qui ex provincia convenerant, a lacu lemanno, qui in flumen rhodanum influit, ad montem iuram, qui fines sequanorum ab helvetiis dividit, milia passuum xviiii murum in altitudinem PEDUM SEDECIM fossamque perducit."|"3. pedum sedecim: descriptive genitive, designating size; see trium mensium, p. 59,1. 8.	%murum fossamque: see 97."

"NOT FOUND"|"mirum: agreeing with the indirect question, quid . . . esset, which is the subject of videri."

"NOT FOUND"|"pervenissent: why subjunctive ?"

"NOT FOUND"|"ei: ,i.e. to Dumnorix."

"his facile pulsis ac proturbatis, incredibili celeritate ad flumen decucurrerunt, ut paene uno tempore et ad silvas et in flumine [et iam IN MANIBUS nostris] hostes viderentur."|"in manibus nostris: close at hand."

"NOT FOUND"|"iis: H. 426, 1; LM. 531; A. 227; G. 346; B. 187, II; (H. 385,1)."

"NOT FOUND"|"Digitized by GOOglCNOTES ***BOOK II, 9-11In the direct form we should have optimum est and conveniamus. The subject of esse is domum suam quemque reverti."

"NOT FOUND"|"20. ut . *** . prohiberent: object clause of purpose, cognate object of imperavit."

"helvetios, tulingos, latobrigos in fines suos, unde erant profecti, reverti iussit, et, quod omnibus frugibus amissis domi nihil erat quo famem tolerarent, allobrogibus imperavit ut iis frumenti copiam facerent; ipsos oppida vicosque, QUOS INCENDERANT, restituere iussit."|"quos incenderant: the indicative shows that Caesar has in mind the particular towns mentioned in chapter 5. The subjunctive would make the expression general *** any towns which they had burned."

"postridie eius diei caesar praesidio utrisque castris quod satis esse visum est reliquit, alarios omnes in conspectu hostium pro castris minoribus constituit, quod minus multitudine militum legionariorum pro hostium numero valebat, ut AD SPECIEM alariis uteretur; ipse triplici instructa acie usque ad castra hostium accessit."|"ad Speciem: for show ; i.e. to impress the enemy by a show of numbers."

"NOT FOUND"|"Page 158, line 5. *** profectum: infinitive from proficio; the subject is satis."

"NOT FOUND"|"desperantes . . . pugna: them (the Gauls) already despairing of a battle."

"horum omnium fortissimi sunt belgae, PROPTEREA QUOD a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important,  proximique sunt germanis, qui trans rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt."|"propterea quod . *** . Obtenturus esset: subordinate clause in the indirectOriginal fromUNIVERSITY OF IOWANgdiscourse; hence the subjunctive. H. 643; LM. 1026; A. 336, 2; G. 650; B. 314, 15 (H. 524)."

"atque in eam rem omnium nostrorum intentis animis alia ex parte oppidi adiatunnus, qui summam imperii tenebat, cum dc devotis, quos illi soldurios appellant, quorum HAEC EST condicio, ut omnibus in vita commodis una cum iis fruantur quorum se amicitiae dediderint, si quid his per vim accidat, aut eundem casum una ferant aut sibi mortem consciscant;  neque adhuc hominum memoria repertus est quisquam qui, eo interfecto cuius se amicitiae devovisset, mortem recusaret   cum his adiatunnus eruptionem facere conatus clamore ab ea parte munitionis sublato cum ad arma milites concurrissent vehementerque ibi pugnatum esset, repulsus in oppidum tamen uti eadem deditionis condicione uteretur a crasso impetravit."|"haec est condicio: explained by the clause uti ***.. fruantur ... consciscant. Plutarch says that a similar custom prevailed among the Iberians, in Spain."

"NOT FOUND"|"damnatum: if condemned. It agrees with the omitted object of sequi. H. 638, 2; LM. 1017; A. 292; B. 337, 2, b; (H. 549, 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"qutm ... Haedui: whom (referring to the person invested with the chief magistracy) the Haedui call vergobretus."

"NOT FOUND"|"Explain the ablatives in this chapter."

"NOT FOUND"|"cur . . . iudicaret: what kind -of a subjunctive would this be in the direct discourse? H. 559, 4; LM. 723; A. 268; G. 466; B. 277; (H. 484, 5)."

"SI QUOs adversum proelium et fuga gallorum commoveret, hos, si quaererent, reperire posse diuturnitate belli defatigatis gallis ariovistum, cum multos menses castris se ac paludibus tenuisset neque sui potestatem fecisset, desperantes iam de pugna et dispersos subito adortum magis ratione et consilio quam virtute vicisse."|"si quo .. . esset: render freely, if they should be needed anywhere; indirect clause, depending on ut. .. possent. H. 652; LM. 793; A. 342; G. 663, 1; B.324; (H. 529, II)."

"NOT FOUND"|"qui: note that qui agrees with Rheno, not with flumine, and also that qui in line 12 agrees with Rhodano."

"NOT FOUND"|"cum ... divideret: causal clause; subjunctive in the direct discourse."

"NOT FOUND"|"quarum : partitive genitive, depending on unam = unam partem. H. 442; LM. 560; A. 216, a; G. 367; B. 201; (H. 397)."

"volusenus perspectis regionibus omnibus QUANTUM EI facultatis dari potuit, qui navi egredi ac se barbaris committere non auderet, v. die ad caesarem revertitur quaeque ibi perspexisset renuntiat."|"quantum ei facultatis: as far as the opportunity, etc."

"NOT FOUND"|"425, 4, N.; LM. 538; A. 235, a; G. 350, 2; B. 188, 15 (H. 384, 4, N. 2)."

"NOT FOUND"|"castris: place and means; cf. oppidis recipere, p. 101,1. 8."

"helvetii ea spe deiecti navibus iunctis ratibusque compluribus factis, alii vadis rhodani, qua minima altitudo fluminis erat, non numQUAM INterdiu, saepius noctu, si perrumpere possent conati, operis munitione et militum concursu et telis repulsi, hoc conatu destiterunt."|"Quam in partem: to whatever place,quaeque signa: and whatever standards,ad haec constitit: near these (i.e. these standards) he took his place."

"NOT FOUND"|"Quod: this, i.e. the mode of attack just described, turn: on this occasion."

"NOT FOUND"|"CUl. . . fidem habebat: in whom he was wont to place the fullest confidence in everything; lit. in reference to whom he was having the highest confidence of all things; cui is dative of reference; rerum limits fidem and adds emphasis to summam."

"nam quod hostibus adpropinquabat, consuetudine sua caesar vi LEGIONES EXPEDITAS ducebat;  post eas totius exercitus impedimenta conlocarat; inde duae legiones quae proxime conscriptae erant totum agmen claudebant praesidioque impedimentis erant."|"legiones expeditas ducebat: see 70."

"caesar id quod erat suspicatus aliquid novi a barbaris initum consilii, cohortes quae in statione erant secum in eam partem proficisci, EX RELIQUIS duas in stationem succedere, reliquas armari et confestim sese subsequi iussit."|"ex reliquis .. . succedere: two of the other (six) cohorts to take their place on guard. He could spare only two cohorts to guard the gates."

"NOT FOUND"|"2 3- diligentia: not diligence, but care, watchfulness."

"NOT FOUND"|"ut. . . imperarent: substantive clause with the potential subjunctive, subject of esse; cf. futurum ut. . . haberet, p. 62,1. 20. H. 571, 2; LM. 902; A. 332; G. 557; B. 297, 3; (H. 501, 2)."

